23199027

1. Virol J. 2012 Dec 3;9:300. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-9-300.

Sequence and phylogenetic analysis of highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1
viruses isolated during 2006-2008 outbreaks in Pakistan reveals genetic
diversity.

Siddique N(1), Naeem K, Abbas MA, Ahmed Z, Malik SA.

Author information: 
(1)National Reference Lab for Poultry Diseases, Animal Sciences Institute,
National Agricultural Research Centre, Islamabad, 45500, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: Since the first outbreak recorded in northern areas of Pakistan in
early 2006, highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 viruses were isolated from
commercial poultry and wild/domestic birds from different areas of Pakistan up to
July 2008. Different isolates of H5N1 were sequenced to explore the genetic
diversity of these viruses.
RESULTS: Phylogenetic analysis revealed close clustering and highest sequence
identity in all 8 genes to HPAI H5N1 isolates belonging to unified H5 clade 2.2, 
sub-lineage EMA-3 recovered from Afghanistan during the same time period. Two
subgroups within Pakistani H5N1 viruses, from domestic and wild birds, were
observed on the basis of their sequence homology and mutations. HPAI motif,
preferred receptor specificity for α-(2, 3) linkages, potential N-linked
glycosylation sites and an additional glycosylation site at the globular head of 
HA protein of four Pakistani H5N1 isolates. While, the amino acids associated
with sensitivities to various antiviral drugs (Oseltamivir, Zanamivir,
Amantadine) were found conserved for the Pakistani H5N1 isolates. Conspicuously, 
some important mutations observed at critical positions of antigenic sites
(S141P, D155S, R162I & P181S) and at receptor binding pocket (A185T, R189K &
S217P) of HA-1. A high sequence similarity between Pakistani HP H5N1 and LP H9N2 
viruses was also observed. Avian like host specific markers with the exception of
E627K in PB2, K356R in PA, V33I in NP, I28V in M2 and L107F in NS2 proteins were 
also observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Various point mutations in different genes of H5 viruses from
Pakistan were observed during its circulation in the field. The outbreaks started
in Khyber Pakhtoon Khawa (North West) province in 2006 and spread to the Southern
regions over a period of time. Though migratory birds may have a role for this
continued endemicity of clade 2.2 H5N1 viruses during 2006-2008 in Pakistan, the 
possibility of their transmission through legal or illegal poultry trade across
the borders cannot be ignored.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-9-300 
PMCID: PMC3546873
PMID: 23199027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12021367

1. J Virol. 2002 Jun;76(12):6344-55.

Characterization of a highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza A virus isolated
from duck meat.

Tumpey TM(1), Suarez DL, Perkins LE, Senne DA, Lee JG, Lee YJ, Mo IP, Sung HW,
Swayne DE.

Author information: 
(1)Southeast Poultry Research Laboratory, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Agricultural Research Service, Athens, Georgia 30605, USA. ttumpey@seprl.usda.gov

Since the 1997 H5N1 influenza virus outbreak in humans and poultry in Hong Kong, 
the emergence of closely related viruses in poultry has raised concerns that
additional zoonotic transmissions of influenza viruses from poultry to humans may
occur. In May 2001, an avian H5N1 influenza A virus was isolated from duck meat
that had been imported to South Korea from China. Phylogenetic analysis of the
hemagglutinin (HA) gene of A/Duck/Anyang/AVL-1/01 showed that the virus clustered
with the H5 Goose/Guandong/1/96 lineage and 1997 Hong Kong human isolates and
possessed an HA cleavage site sequence identical to these isolates. Following
intravenous or intranasal inoculation, this virus was highly pathogenic and
replicated to high titers in chickens. The pathogenesis of DK/Anyang/AVL-1/01
virus in Pekin ducks was further characterized and compared with a recent H5N1
isolate, A/Chicken/Hong Kong/317.5/01, and an H5N1 1997 chicken isolate,
A/Chicken/Hong Kong/220/97. Although no clinical signs of disease were observed
in H5N1 virus-inoculated ducks, infectious virus could be detected in lung
tissue, cloacal, and oropharyngeal swabs. The DK/Anyang/AVL-1/01 virus was unique
among the H5N1 isolates in that infectious virus and viral antigen could also be 
detected in muscle and brain tissue of ducks. The pathogenesis of
DK/Anyang/AVL-1/01 virus was characterized in BALB/c mice and compared with the
other H5N1 isolates. All viruses replicated in mice, but in contrast to the
highly lethal CK/HK/220/97 virus, DK/Anyang/AVL-1/01 and CK/HK/317.5/01 viruses
remained localized to the respiratory tract. DK/Anyang/AVL-1/01 virus caused
weight loss and resulted in 22 to 33% mortality, whereas CK/HK/317.5/01-infected 
mice exhibited no morbidity or mortality. The isolation of a highly pathogenic
H5N1 influenza virus from poultry indicates that such viruses are still
circulating in China and may present a risk for transmission of the virus to
humans.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.76.12.6344-6355.2002 
PMCID: PMC136198
PMID: 12021367  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20016038

1. J Gen Virol. 2010 Apr;91(Pt 4):960-70. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.016733-0. Epub 2009 Dec
16.

Phylogeny and genotyping of recent avian low-pathogenic H5 subtype influenza
viruses from French ducks.

Briand FX(1), Le Gall-Reculé G, Guillou-Cloarec C, Ogor K, Jestin V.

Author information: 
(1)AFSSA, French Reference Laboratory for Avian Influenza and Newcastle Disease, 
Avian and Rabbit Virology, Immunology and Parasitology Unit, BP 53, 22440
Ploufragan, France.

H5 low-pathogenic avian influenza virus (LPAIV) has the potential to become
highly pathogenic and to cause serious problems in animal and public health. AIV 
surveillance and characterization in both wild and domestic species is therefore 
necessary. In order to acquire molecular information and to identify possible
reassortments in French viruses, we analysed the entire genome of five H5N3,
three H5N2 and two H5N1 LPAIV, isolated in France between 2002 and 2008 mostly
from captive ducks (free-range commercial poultry or decoy ducks). Some of the
genome sequences showed atypical characteristics, such as an insertion of 1 aa in
the PB1 protein of one H5N3, a highly truncated PB1-F2 protein (11 aa in length
instead of 90 aa) in one H5N2, and an insertion of 8 aa in the NS1 protein of
H5N1. These two last molecular characteristics have not been described
previously. Phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that all genes of French LPAIV,
except the closely related matrix protein genes, clustered within the Eurasian
avian influenzavirus lineage and fell into at least two phylogenetic subgroups.
In addition, the French H5 LPAIV were segregated into eight genotypes, suggesting
that many reassortment events have occurred in H5 LPAIV in Europe. However, it is
not known whether the reassortment events have occurred in wild waterfowl and/or 
in captive birds in direct or indirect contact with wild birds.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.016733-0 
PMID: 20016038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22710372

1. Emerg Infect Dis. 2012 Jul;18(7):1139-43. doi: 10.3201/eid1807.111642.

Multiple introductions of avian influenza viruses (H5N1), Laos, 2009-2010.

Sonnberg S(1), Phommachanh P, Naipospos TS, McKenzie J, Chanthavisouk C,
Pathammavong S, Darnell D, Meeduangchanh P, Rubrum AM, Souriya M, Khambounheuang 
B, Webby RJ, Douangngeun B, Webster RG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, St Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee
38105, USA. stephanie.sonnberg@stjude.org

Avian influenza viruses (H5N1) of clades 2.3.4.1, 2.3.4.2, and 2.3.2.1 were
introduced into Laos in 2009-2010. To investigate these viruses, we conducted
active surveillance of poultry during March 2010. We detected viruses throughout 
Laos, including several interclade reassortants and 2 subgroups of clade 2.3.4,
one of which caused an outbreak in May 2010.

DOI: 10.3201/eid1807.111642 
PMCID: PMC3376794
PMID: 22710372  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29104094

1. Infect Genet Evol. 2018 Jan;57:98-105. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2017.10.027. Epub
2017 Nov 15.

A two-year monitoring period of the genetic properties of clade 2.3.2.1c H5N1
viruses in Nigeria reveals the emergence and co-circulation of distinct
genotypes.

Laleye A(1), Joannis T(2), Shittu I(2), Meseko C(2), Zamperin G(3), Milani A(3), 
Zecchin B(3), Fusaro A(3), Monne I(3), Abolnik C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Production Animal Studies, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
University of Pretoria, Onderstepoort 0110, South Africa; National Veterinary
Research Institute, Vom, Nigeria. Electronic address: agneslaleye@nvri.gov.ng.
(2)National Veterinary Research Institute, Vom, Nigeria.
(3)Istituto Zooproflattico Sperimentale delle Venezie, Legnaro, Italy.
(4)Department of Production Animal Studies, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
University of Pretoria, Onderstepoort 0110, South Africa.

Phylogenetic analyses of the complete genomes of the highly pathogenic avian
influenza (HPAI) 2.3.2.1c H5N1 virus strains causing outbreaks in Nigeria's
poultry population from 2014 to 2016 showed evidence of distinct co-circulating
genotypes and the emergence of reassortant viruses. One of these reassortants
became the predominant strain by 2016, and the NA protein of this strain
possessed the V96A substitution known to confer reduced susceptibility to
neuraminidase inhibiting antiviral drugs. Our findings also demonstrated
evolutionary relationships between Nigerian isolates and European and Middle
Eastern strains of H5N1 which provides further evidence for the proposed role of 
migratory birds in spreading the virus, although the involvement of the live
poultry trade cannot be excluded. Efforts must be directed towards improving
biosecurity and gaining the cooperation of poultry farmers for more effective
control of HPAI, in order to mitigate the emergence of HPAI strains in Nigeria
with biological properties that are potentially even more dangerous to animals
and humans.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2017.10.027 
PMID: 29104094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16845780

1. Emerg Infect Dis. 2006 Jul;12(7):1167-9.

H5N1 Influenza Virus, Domestic Birds, Western Siberia, Russia.

Shestopalov AM, Durimanov AG, Evseenko VA, Ternovoi VA, Rassadkin YN, Razumova
YV, Zaykovskaya AV, Zolotykh SI, Netesov SV.

DOI: 10.3201/eid1207.051338 
PMCID: PMC3291046
PMID: 16845780  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25938456

1. PLoS One. 2015 May 4;10(5):e0124422. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124422.
eCollection 2015.

Additional Evidence That the Polymerase Subunits Contribute to the Viral
Replication and the Virulence of H5N1 Avian Influenza Virus Isolates in Mice.

Qu X(1), Ding L(1), Qin Z(1), Wu J(1), Pan Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan 430072, China.

Genetically similar H5N1 viruses circulating in the avian reservoir exhibit
different levels of pathogenicity in mice. In this study, we characterized two
highly pathogenic H5N1 avian isolates--A/Hunan/316/2005 (HN05), which is highly
pathogenic in mice, and A/Hubei/489/2004 (HB04), which is nonpathogenic. In
mammalian cells, HN05 replicates more efficiently than HB04, although both
viruses have similar growth kinetics in avian cells. We used reverse genetics to 
generate recombinant H5N1 strains containing genes from HN05 and HB04 and
examined their virulence. HN05 genes encoding the polymerase complex determine
pathogenicity and viral replication ability both in vitro and in vivo. The PB2
subunit plays an important role in enhancing viral replication, and the PB1 and
PA subunits contribute mainly to pathogenicity in mice. These results can be used
to elucidate host-range expansion and the molecular basis of the high virulence
of H5N1 viruses in mammalian species.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124422 
PMCID: PMC4418698
PMID: 25938456  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28036106

1. J Med Virol. 2017 Jul;89(7):1179-1185. doi: 10.1002/jmv.24762. Epub 2017 Feb 27.

Genetic characterization and phylogenic analysis of H5N1 avian influenza virus
detected in peafowl in Kirkuk province, Iraq.

Rashid PMA(1), Saeed NM(2), Dyary HO(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Slemani Veterinary Directorate, As
Sulaymaniyah, Kurdistan region, Iraq.
(2)Basic Sciences Department, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Sulaimani, As Sulaymaniyah, Kurdistan region, Iraq.

A highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI), H5N1, was detected for the first time
in peafowls in Kirkuk province, Iraq in 2015. Genetic analysis of the Kirkuk H5N1
indicated molecular markers for avian-type receptors. The Kirkuk H5N1
hemagglutinin gene had an infrequent amino acid cleavage site (SPQREKRRKRGLF),
and neuraminidase genes showed sensitive molecular markers for antiviral drugs.
Additionally, the phylogenetic analysis found that the Kirkuk H5N1 belonged to
subclade 2.3.2.1c. Our results showed that the 2015 H5N1 from the Iraqi city of
Kirkuk exhibited new genetic characterization and was different from the 2006
H5N1 isolate from Iraq.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.24762 
PMID: 28036106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19074791

1. Vet Rec. 2008 Dec 13;163(24):722-3.

Characterisation of highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses in Myanmar.

Saito T(1), Uchida Y, Myint WW, Thein WZ, Watanabe C, Takemae N, Mase M, Okamatsu
M, Mar A, Mon CC, Gawng LT, Sann K, Kyi TA, Yamaguchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Research Teams for Zoonotic Diseases, National Institute of Animal Health,
National Agriculture and Food Research Organization, 3-1-5 Kannondai, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki 305-0856, Japan.

DOI: 10.1136/vr.163.24.722 
PMID: 19074791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27162026

1. Sci Rep. 2016 May 10;6:25845. doi: 10.1038/srep25845.

Fatal influenza A (H5N1) virus Infection in zoo-housed Tigers in Yunnan Province,
China.

Hu T(1), Zhao H(2), Zhang Y(3), Zhang W(2), Kong Q(2)(4), Zhang Z(1), Cui Q(1),
Qiu W(1), Deng B(1), Fan Q(1), Zhang F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, Chengdu Military Region, Kunming
650118, China.
(2)Centre for Animal Disease Control and Prevention, Yunnan Province, Kunming
650051, China.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fudan University Shanghai
Medical College, Shanghai 200030, China.
(4)Yunnan Agriculture University, Kunming 650223, China.

From 2014 to 2015, three cases of highly pathogenic avian influenza infection
occurred in zoo-housed north-east China tigers (Panthera tigris ssp.altaica) and 
four tigers died of respiratory distress in succession in Yunnan Province, China.
We isolated and characterized three highly pathogenic avian influenza A(H5N1)
viruses from these tigers. Phylogenetic analysis indicated that A/tiger /Yunnan
/tig1404 /2014(H5N1) belongs to the provisional subclade 2.3.4.4e which were
novel reassortant influenza A (H5N1) viruses with six internal genes from avian
influenza A (H5N2) viruses. The HA gene of the isolated A/tiger /Yunnan /tig1412 
/2014(H5N1) virus belongs to the subclade 2.3.2.1b. The isolated A/tiger /Yunnan 
/tig1508/2015 (H5N1) virus was a novel reassortant influenza A (H5N1) virus with 
three internal genes (PB2, PB1 and M) from H9N2 virus and belongs to the subclade
2.3.2.1c.

DOI: 10.1038/srep25845 
PMCID: PMC4861906
PMID: 27162026  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15859328

1. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2005 Jan;21(1):47-51.

[Characterization of murine leukemia virus recombinants that express H5N1 subtype
avian influenza virus hemagglutinin glycoproteins].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu HL(1), Rong LJ, Zhou B, Wei JC, Zheng QS, Chen PY.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Animal Diseases Diagnostic and Immunology, Ministry of Agriculture,
Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China.

One highly pathogenic strain of avian influenza virus (AIV) was isolated from
goose in China recently, designated as F-3. In order to study the viral entry
mechanisms, the hemagglutinin (HA) gene of H5N1 subtype AIV isolate was amplified
by RT-PCR, and then cloned into pGEM-T vector and sequenced. The sequencing
result has logging in GenBank, the accession number was AY639405. The HA gene of 
F-3 had a complete open reading frame (ORE) and composed of 1707 nucleotides,
coding for 568 amino acids. The deduced amino acid sequence at the cleavage site 
of the HA protein was RKKR GLF, matched to the characteristic of virulent avian
influenza strain. The HA gene were subcloned into pcDNA3, so the plasmid pcDNA-HA
can express the HA glycoprotein. Co-transfected pcDNA-HA, pHIT60 (include Murine 
Leukemia Virus structural genes, namely gag and pol) and pHIT111 (retroviral
vector genome,containing LacZ as a reporter) into 293T cells. The retroviral
supernatant were harvested 48 hours post-transfection, filtered through 0.45
micromol/L filter. The supernatant were used to analysis the characteristic of
the pseudotyping virions by Western blotting and infection test. Western blotting
revealed the HA glycoproteins can be expressed on the virions, indicated the
glycoproteins were incorporated onto the retroviral virions. Infection test were 
performed on 293T, NIH3T3 and COS-7, all the three kinds of cells infected were
lacZ positive, indicating viral entry, and revealed the pseudotype virions of
MuLV-HA were infectious. So the pseudotype system of MuLV particles with AIV
Hemagglutinin proteins were setted up and it can be used to study the entry of
avian influenza virus isolated from goose in China.


PMID: 15859328  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16183140

1. J Virol Methods. 2006 Feb;131(2):143-7. Epub 2005 Sep 23.

Single step multiplex real-time RT-PCR for H5N1 influenza A virus detection.

Payungporn S(1), Chutinimitkul S, Chaisingh A, Damrongwantanapokin S, Buranathai 
C, Amonsin A, Theamboonlers A, Poovorawan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence in Viral Hepatitis Research, Faculty of Medicine,
Chulalongkorn University, Pathumwan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.

H5N1 influenza A virus causes a rapidly fatal systemic disease in domestic
poultry and spreads directly from poultry to mammalian species such as leopards, 
tigers and humans. The aim of this study was to develop a multiplex real-time
RT-PCR for rapid detection of H5N1 influenza A virus. The selected primers and
various labeled TaqMan MGB reporter probes corresponding to M, H5 and N1 were
used in a single step multiplex real-time RT-PCR to simultaneously detect triple 
fluorescent signals. In order to validate the method, 75 clinical specimens
infected with H5N1 isolated from both poultry and mammals, as well as various
specimens of other subtypes and RNA from other viral pathogens of poultry and
human were tested. The results showed that the multiplex real-time RT-PCR assays 
can be applied to detect virus suspensions of H5N1 influenza A virus from a wide 
host range and demonstrated the sensitivity of the assay amounted to
approximately 10(2)-10(3)copies/mul. In conclusion, the highlights of this
particular method lie in its rapidity, specificity and sensitivity thus rendering
it feasible and effective for large-scale screening at times of H5N1 influenza A 
virus outbreaks.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2005.08.004 
PMID: 16183140  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16713612

1. Virology. 2006 Jul 5;350(2):258-68. Epub 2006 May 19.

Evolution and adaptation of H5N1 influenza virus in avian and human hosts in
Indonesia and Vietnam.

Smith GJ(1), Naipospos TS, Nguyen TD, de Jong MD, Vijaykrishna D, Usman TB,
Hassan SS, Nguyen TV, Dao TV, Bui NA, Leung YH, Cheung CL, Rayner JM, Zhang JX,
Zhang LJ, Poon LL, Li KS, Nguyen VC, Hien TT, Farrar J, Webster RG, Chen H,
Peiris JS, Guan Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Emerging Infectious Diseases, Department of
Microbiology, The University of Hong Kong, Faculty of Medicine Building, 21
Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza virus H5N1 is endemic in poultry in East and
Southeast Asia with disease outbreaks recently spreading to parts of central
Asia, Europe and Africa. Continued interspecies transmission to humans has been
reported in Vietnam, Thailand, Cambodia, Indonesia and China, causing pandemic
concern. Here, we genetically characterize 82 H5N1 viruses isolated from poultry 
throughout Indonesia and Vietnam and 11 human isolates from southern Vietnam
together with sequence data available in public databases to address questions
relevant to virus introduction, endemicity and evolution. Phylogenetic analysis
shows that all viruses from Indonesia form a distinct sublineage of H5N1 genotype
Z viruses suggesting this outbreak likely originated from a single introduction
that spread throughout the country during the past two years. Continued virus
activities in Indonesia were attributed to transmission via poultry movement
within the country rather than through repeated introductions by bird migration. 
Within Indonesia and Vietnam, H5N1 viruses have evolved over time into
geographically distinct groups within each country. Molecular analysis of the
H5N1 genotype Z genome shows that only the M2 and PB1-F2 genes were under
positive selection, suggesting that these genes might be involved in adaptation
of this virus to new hosts following interspecies transmission. At the amino acid
level 12 residues were under positive selection in those genotype Z viruses, in
the HA and PB1-F2 proteins. Some of these residues were more frequently observed 
in human isolates than in avian isolates and are related to viral antigenicity
and receptor binding. Our study provides insight into the ongoing evolution of
H5N1 influenza viruses that are transmitting in diverse avian species and at the 
interface between avian and human hosts.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2006.03.048 
PMID: 16713612  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21466927

1. Vet Microbiol. 2011 Aug 5;151(3-4):386-9. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2011.03.004. Epub
2011 Mar 10.

H5N1 subtype highly pathogenic avian influenza virus isolated from healthy
mallard captured in South Korea.

Kim HR(1), Kim BS, Bae YC, Moon OK, Oem JK, Kang HM, Choi JG, Lee OS, Lee YJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Veterinary Research and Quarantine Service, 175 Anyangro Manangu
Anyangsi, Gyeonggido 430-824, South Korea.

On December 7, 2010, H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza virus was isolated
from a healthy mallard captured at the Mankyung River in South Korea.
Phylogenetic analysis showed that this virus was classified into clade 2.3.2 and 
closely related to H5N1 viruses isolated from wild birds in Mongolia, Russia and 
China in 2009 and 2010.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2011.03.004 
PMID: 21466927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23402103

1. Avian Dis. 2012 Dec;56(4 Suppl):849-57.

Effect of cocirculation of highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 subtype with
low pathogenic H9N2 subtype on the spread of infections.

Arafa AS(1), Hagag NM, Yehia N, Zanaty AM, Naguib MM, Nasef SA.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory for Veterinary Quality Control on Poultry Production,
Animal Health Research Institute, P.O. Box 264-Dokki, Giza-12618, Egypt.
araby85@hotmail.com

Widespread prevalence of avian influenza H9N2 subtype in the Middle East region
and its detection in Egypt in quail in early summer 2011 added another risk
factor to the Egyptian poultry industry in addition to highly pathogenic H5N1
subtype. This situation increases the need for further surveillance and
investigation of H9N2 viruses in commercial and household chickens. This work
describes detection and genetic characterization of recently isolated H9N2
viruses from chicken flocks. Parallel detection and genetic characterization of
H5N1 viruses from infections in poultry has also been done to compare the
prevalence of the two subtypes in close geographic locations in Egypt.
Phylogenetic analysis of the HA gene showed that the Egyptian isolates of H9N2
were grouped together within the quail/Hong Kong/G1/97-like lineage, similar to
the circulating viruses in the Middle East, with very close phylogeny to the
Israeli viruses. The prevalence of H5N1 viruses from cases recorded in poultry in
the nearby areas revealed a marked decrease in disease incidence in commercial
broilers but an increased incidence in household birds. The genetic
characterization of the H5N1 viruses indicated predominance of the classic 2.2.1 
subclade, with evolution of new viruses and no detection for the variant 2.2.1.1 
subclade. The cocirculation of the two subtypes, H5N1 and H9N2, of avian
influenza may affect the limit of spread and the epizootiologic pattern of the
infections for both subtypes, especially when different vaccination and
biosecurity approaches are applied in the field level.

DOI: 10.1637/10152-040812-Reg.1 
PMID: 23402103  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18984006

1. J Virol Methods. 2009 Feb;155(2):193-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2008.10.001. Epub
2008 Dec 3.

A reverse transcription-PCR for subtyping of the neuraminidase of avian influenza
viruses.

Qiu BF(1), Liu WJ, Peng DX, Hu SL, Tang YH, Liu XF.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Infectious Disease Laboratory, School of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou 
University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu 225009, China.

To date, nine neuraminidase (NA) subtypes of avian influenza viruses have been
identified. In order to differentiate the NA of avian influenza viruses rapidly, 
a reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) was developed. Nine pairs of NA-specific
primers for the RT-PCR were designed based on the analysis of 509 complete NA
sequences in GenBank. The primers were designed to amplify partial NA genes and
each pair is unique to a single NA subtype (N1-N9). By nine RT-PCRs
simultaneously in a set of separate tubes, the subtype of NA was determined by
subsequent agarose gel electrophoresis and ethidium bromide staining, since only 
one of the nine RT-PCRs would give a product of expected size for each virus
strain. In comparison with the established method of sequence analysis of 101
reference strains or isolates of avian influenza viruses, the RT-PCR method had a
sensitivity of 97.3% and a specificity of 91.1% in subtyping avian influenza
viruses. These results indicate that the RT-PCR method described below provides a
specific and sensitive alternative to conventional NA-subtyping methods.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2008.10.001 
PMID: 18984006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23683998

1. Vet Microbiol. 2013 Aug 30;165(3-4):341-8. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2013.04.021.
Epub 2013 Apr 28.

Molecular characterization of a H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza virus
clade 2.3.2.1b circulating in Vietnam in 2011.

Tung DH(1), Van Quyen D, Nguyen T, Xuan HT, Nam TN, Duy KD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, Institute of Biotechnology, Vietnam
Academy of Science and Technology, 18 - Hoang Quoc Viet Rd, Hanoi, Viet Nam.

The emergence of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 viruses and the
risk of a human pandemic have highlighted the need for advance stockpiling of
vaccine. Current vaccines may be sub-optimally matched to the actual pandemic
virus due to the rapid dissemination and ongoing evolution of avian H5N1 viruses.
We report here the evaluation of efficacy of NIBRG-14 vaccine (clade 1
A/Vietnam/1194/2004) against the H5N1 HPAI virus strains circulating in Vietnam. 
The birds were either vaccinated with a single or booster dose of vaccine by
subcutaneous injection; then challenged with three H5N1 HPAI viruses (clade 1,
clade 2.3.2.1a and clade 2.3.2.1b) at day 21 post-vaccination (p. v.). The
results showed that NIBRG-14 vaccine protected birds from clade 1 and clade
2.3.2.1a infections. Notably, we observed that NIGRG-14 vaccine did not confer
protection against clade 2.3.2.1b challenge virus. To get new insights of how
H5N1 clade 2.3.2.1b (A/Duck/QuangNgai/1037/11) virus can escape from the host
immune response induced by the vaccine, we further analyzed the HA gene - a key
virulence determinant of the virus. Amino acid sequence analysis indicated that
this virus contained the sequence SPQRERRRK-R/G at the cleavage site in the HA
molecule, indicating its high virulence. Additionally, we identified numerous
mutations with amino acid substitutions in the hemagglutinin: M226I, I239S
located at N-link glycosylation site and 2H, 45N, 53K 120D, 133A and 14N
mutations at antigenic site, which can affect receptor specificity as well as
viral pathogenicity. Notably, I239S and S133A mutations are unique to
A/Duck/QuangNgai/1037/2011, suggesting that it may involve in the virus' ability 
to evade the host immune system. Taken together, phylogenetic analysis showed
that continual mutations in the HA gene may have generated a novel antigenic
strain and that probably changed the virulence of the virus and made the H5N1
clade 2.3.2.1b resistant to NIBRG-14 vaccine.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2013.04.021 
PMID: 23683998  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22377052

1. Emerg Infect Dis. 2012 Mar;18(3):480-3. doi: 10.3201/eid1803.111490.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza (H5N1) outbreaks in wild birds and poultry,
South Korea.

Kim HR(1), Lee YJ, Park CK, Oem JK, Lee OS, Kang HM, Choi JG, Bae YC.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Disease Diagnosis ivision, Animal, Plant and Fisheries Quarantine and
Inspection Agency, Anyang, South Korea.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza (H5N1) among wild birds emerged simultaneously 
with outbreaks in domestic poultry in South Korea during November 2010-May 2011. 
Phylogenetic analysis showed that these viruses belonged to clade 2.3.2, as did
viruses found in Mongolia, the People's Republic of China, and Russia in 2009 and
2010.

DOI: 10.3201/eid1803.111490 
PMCID: PMC3309593
PMID: 22377052  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15964604

1. Virology. 2005 Aug 15;339(1):101-9.

Isolation of a genotypically unique H5N1 influenza virus from duck meat imported 
into Japan from China.

Mase M(1), Eto M, Tanimura N, Imai K, Tsukamoto K, Horimoto T, Kawaoka Y,
Yamaguchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Animal Health, 3-1-5 
Kannondai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0856, Japan. masema@affrc.go.jp

An H5N1 influenza A virus was isolated from duck meat processed for human
consumption, imported to Japan from Shandong Province, China in 2003. This virus 
was antigenically different from other H5 viruses, including the Hong Kong H5N1
viruses isolated from humans in 1997 and 2003. Sequence analysis revealed that
six genes (PB1, PA, HA, NA, M, and NS) of this virus showed >97% nucleotide
identity with their counterparts from recent H5N1 viruses, but that the remaining
two genes (PB2 and NP) were derived from other unknown viruses. This duck meat
isolate was highly pathogenic to chickens upon intravenous or intranasal
inoculation, replicated well in the lungs of mice and spread to the brain, but
was not as pathogenic in mice as H5N1 human isolates (with a dose lethal to 50%
of mice (MLD50)=5x10(6) 50% egg infectious doses [EID50]). However, viruses
isolated from the brain of mice previously infected with the virus were
substantially more pathogenic (MLD50=approximately 10(2) EID50) and possessed
some amino acid substitutions relative to the original virus. These results show 
that poultry products contaminated with influenza viruses of high pathogenic
potential to mammals are a threat to public health even in countries where the
virus is not enzootic and represent a possible source of influenza outbreaks in
poultry.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2005.05.010 
PMID: 15964604  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18712589

1. Virus Genes. 2008 Dec;37(3):289-97. doi: 10.1007/s11262-008-0272-7. Epub 2008 Aug
20.

Genetic characterization of avian influenza viruses isolated in Israel during
2000-2006.

Golender N(1), Panshin A, Banet-Noach C, Nagar S, Pokamunski S, Pirak M, Tendler 
Y, Davidson I, García M, Perk S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Avian and Aquatic Diseases, Kimron Veterinary Institute, P.O.B.
12, Beit Dagan, 50250, Israel.

Our aim was to establish the phylogenetic and genetic relationships among avian
influenza viruses (AIV) recently isolated from poultry in Israel. During this
study we analyzed complete nucleotide sequences of two envelope (hemagglutinin
and neuraminidase) and six internal genes (polymerase B1, polymerase B2,
polymerase A, nucleoprotein, nonstructural, and matrix) of 29 selected H9N2 and
six internal genes of five H5N1 viruses isolated in Israel during 2000-2006.
Comparative genetic and phylogenetic analyses of these sequences revealed that
the local H5N1 viruses are closely related to H5N1 viruses isolated in European, 
Asian, and Middle Eastern countries in 2005-2006. The H9N2 Israeli isolates,
together with viruses isolated in Jordan and Saudi Arabia formed a single group. 
Our data support the claim that during recent years a new endemic focus of H9N2
has been formed in the Middle East. The introduction of H5N1 and co-circulation
of these two subtypes of AIV in this region may augment the risk of potentially
pandemic strains emergence.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-008-0272-7 
PMID: 18712589  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22371029

1. Arch Virol. 2012 Jun;157(6):1131-6. doi: 10.1007/s00705-012-1259-1. Epub 2012 Feb
28.

Characterization of a highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza virus isolated from 
ducks in Eastern China in 2011.

Hai-bo W(1), Chao-tan G, Ru-feng L, Li-hua X, En-kang W, Jin-biao Y, Yi-ting W,
Qiao-gang W, Nan-ping W.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, First
Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

This study describes the characterization of seven H5N1 avian influenza viruses
from domestic ducks in Eastern China in 2011. Phylogenetic analysis showed these 
viruses were closely related to an H5N1 virus circulating in wild birds in Hong
Kong. Some characteristics of these viruses were similar to those of an H5N1
strain that circulated in China and Vietnam (2003-2004). The virulence of three
isolates was examined in chickens and mice, and they were found to be highly
pathogenic in chickens but showed low pathogenicity in mice. These results
suggest that continued H5N1 surveillance in poultry should be used as an early
warning system for avian influenza outbreaks.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-012-1259-1 
PMID: 22371029  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16447511

1. Dev Biol (Basel). 2006;124:189-99.

Phylogenetic analyses of genes from South African LPAI viruses isolated in 2004
from wild aquatic birds suggests introduction by Eurasian migrants.

Abolnik C(1), Cornelius E, Bisschop SP, Romito M, Verwoerd D.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Division, Onderstepoort Veterinary Institute, South Africa.
abolnikc@arc.agric.za

In 2004, South Africa experienced its first recorded outbreak of a highly
pathogenic notifiable avian influenza (HPNAI) viral strain of the H5N2 subtype in
ostriches in the Eastern Cape province. The traditional ostrich-farming areas in 
the Western Cape province report almost yearly outbreaks of low pathogenicity
avian influenza (LPAI) in ostriches, which is attributed to introduction by wild 
birds and certain climatic patterns. During the winter of 2004, LPAI H3N8, H4N8, 
H5N2 and H5N1 avian influenza viruses were isolated from wild aquatic birds. All 
eight genes of the H3N8, H4N8 and H5N1 viruses were analysed. The results show
that the H5N1 virus does not belong to the HPAI Z/Z+N genotype currently
circulating in Asia, but that the most recent common ancestors are Russian H5N2
and H5N3 viruses. The N1 gene lacks the stalk deletion associated with virulence.
Internal genes probably originate from a pool containing Chinese, Middle Eastern 
and Italian viruses. The South African H3N8 and H4N8 viruses appear to have
derived their genes from an ecosystem where Asian H5N1, H6N9 and H9N2, Russian
H4, and Danish H3N8 viruses have been circulating since 1997. All three viruses
share recent nucleoprotein common ancestors with the German and Dutch HPNAI H7N7 
viruses from 2003. The diverse pool of genes from which local viruses are derived
suggests that reassortment occurred at the Siberian breeding grounds where
migratory paths cross, or within the South African ecosystem. This data
highlights the importance of surveillance in aquatic migratory birds,
particularly members of the Charadriidae, for their potential roles in the
introduction of avian diseases to South African poultry and especially ostriches 
in the case of avian influenza.


PMID: 16447511  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18394281

1. Emerg Infect Dis. 2008 Apr;14(4):632-6. doi: 10.3201/eid1404.071343.

Multiple sublineages of influenza A virus (H5N1), Vietnam, 2005-2007.

Dung Nguyen T(1), Vinh Nguyen T, Vijaykrishna D, Webster RG, Guan Y, Malik Peiris
JS, Smith GJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Veterinary Research, Hanoi, Vietnam. dzungntd@gmail.com

Phylogenetic analysis of influenza subtype H5N1 viruses isolated from Vietnam
during 2005-2007 shows that multiple sublineages are present in Vietnam. Clade
2.3.4 viruses have replaced clade 1 viruses in northern Vietnam, and clade 1
viruses have been detected in southern Vietnam. Reassortment between these 2
sublineages has also occurred.

DOI: 10.3201/eid1404.071343 
PMCID: PMC2570938
PMID: 18394281  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27389972

1. Emerg Infect Dis. 2016 Dec;22(12):2132-2136. doi: 10.3201/eid2212.160578. Epub
2016 Dec 15.

Genetically Different Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza A(H5N1) Viruses in West
Africa, 2015.

Tassoni L, Fusaro A, Milani A, Lemey P, Awuni JA, Sedor VB, Dogbey O, Commey AN, 
Meseko C, Joannis T, Minoungou GL, Ouattara L, Haido AM, Cisse-Aman D,
Couacy-Hymann E, Dauphin G, Cattoli G, Monne I.

To trace the evolution of highly pathogenic influenza A(H5N1) virus in West
Africa, we sequenced genomes of 43 viruses collected during 2015 from poultry and
wild birds in 5 countries. We found 2 co-circulating genetic groups within clade 
2.3.2.1c. Mutations that may increase adaptation to mammals raise concern over
possible risk for humans.

DOI: 10.3201/eid2212.160578 
PMCID: PMC5189143
PMID: 27389972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20836384

1. Bing Du Xue Bao. 2010 Jul;26(4):298-304.

[Genome sequencing and genetic analysis of a natural reassortant H5N1 subtype
avian influenza virus possessing H9N2 internal genes].

[Article in Chinese]

Gu M(1), Liu WB, Cao JP, Cao YZ, Zhang XR, Peng DX, Liu XF.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Infectious Diseases, Yang Zhou University, Yang Zhou 
225009, China. lucygu083@yahoo.com.cn

Abstract:One H5N1 subtype avian influenza virus, A/duck/Shandong/009/2008
(Dk/SD/009/08), was isolated from apparently healthy domestic ducks in some live 
bird market in East China during our epidemiological surveillance. To investigate
the genetic composition, Dk/SD/009/08 was subjected to genome sequencing. The
amino acid motif of cleavage site was "PLRERRRK-R/GL", which was consistent with 
the characterization of the HPAIV. According to the newest unified nomenclature
system of H5N1, Dk/SD/ 009/08 was classified into Clade 2.3.4. The BLAST results 
showed that four gene segments (HA, NA, NP and NS) had the highest nucleotide
identities with H5N1 subtype AIVs whereas the remaining four (PB2, PB1, PA and M)
displayed the closest relationship with H9N2 subtype. Therefore, Dk/SD/009/08
might be a natural reassortant virus. The phylogenetic analysis further indicated
that G1-like H9N2 subtype AIVs which was prevalent mainly in quails of Southern
China might provide the internal genes for Dk/ SD/009/08.


PMID: 20836384  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17276709

1. Vet J. 2008 Jan;175(1):96-101. Epub 2007 Feb 5.

Characterization of a new gene (SLC10) with a spliced leader from Taenia solium.

Zheng Y(1), Cai X, Luo X, Hu Z, Jing Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, State Key
Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Lanzhou Veterinary Research
Institute, CAAS, Lanzhou, Gansu 730046, China.

An unknown gene, SLC10, was cloned by spliced leader-based polymerase chain
reaction from Taenia solium. The full length of SLC10 was found to be 635 bp,
encoding an 18.223 kDa protein. ELISA results showed that none of 70 normal and
75 cysticercosis sera samples reacted with purified recombinant SLC10 protein.
Using an immunohistochemical method, it was revealed that the native SLC10
protein distributed extensively in inner cyst walls but not in the scolex in
Cysticercus cellulosae. Together with predicted results, it is suggested that the
SLC10 protein is a non-secretory structural protein, which is not involved in
induction of the host's immune reactions against infection at least at the larval
stage.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2006.11.020 
PMID: 17276709  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18801394

1. Virus Res. 2008 Dec;138(1-2):70-80. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2008.08.007. Epub
2008 Oct 8.

Molecular epidemiological analysis of highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1
subtype isolated from poultry and wild bird in Thailand.

Uchida Y(1), Chaichoune K, Wiriyarat W, Watanabe C, Hayashi T, Patchimasiri T,
Nuansrichay B, Parchariyanon S, Okamatsu M, Tsukamoto K, Takemae N, Ratanakorn P,
Yamaguchi S, Saito T.

Author information: 
(1)Zoonotic Diseases Collaboration Center (ZDCC), Kasetklang, Chatuchak, Bangkok 
10900, Thailand.

A comprehensive molecular epidemiological analysis was performed on highly
pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) viruses of the H5N1 subtype derived from
poultry and wild bird during 2004-2007 in Thailand. Sequence analysis followed by
phylogenetic analysis was applied to all eight segments of the viruses. Viruses
belonging to clades 1 and 2.3.4 in the HA phylogenetic tree have been shown to
circulate in Thailand. Our analysis revealed differential evolution of the HPAI
viruses among clade 1 strains. Isolates from Phichit province in 2006 resided in 
two distinct branches, designated 1.p1 and 1.p2. A hemagglutination inhibition
test with a panel of monoclonal antibodies demonstrated a possible antigenic
drift between the Phichit isolates. Involvement of free-grazing duck practice in 
the area was discussed as a cause of the differential evolution among the Phichit
isolates. A branch, designated 1-TGWB and consisting exclusively of isolates from
zoological tigers and wild birds, was evident in all phylogenetic trees
constructed in the study. The branch's existence indicated that the HPAI viruses 
could have been maintained in the wild bird population for a certain period,
although no involvement of wild birds in HPAI transmission to poultry was evident
in this study.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2008.08.007 
PMID: 18801394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21173241

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jan 4;108(1):349-54. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1012457108.
Epub 2010 Dec 20.

Feasibility of reconstructed ancestral H5N1 influenza viruses for cross-clade
protective vaccine development.

Ducatez MF(1), Bahl J, Griffin Y, Stigger-Rosser E, Franks J, Barman S,
Vijaykrishna D, Webb A, Guan Y, Webster RG, Smith GJ, Webby RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38105-3678, USA.

Since the reemergence of highly pathogenic H5N1 influenza viruses in humans in
2003, these viruses have spread throughout avian species in Asia, Europe, and
Africa. Their sustained circulation has resulted in the evolution of
phylogenetically diverse lineages. Viruses from these lineages show considerable 
antigenic variation, which has confounded vaccine planning efforts. We
reconstructed ancestral protein sequences at several nodes of the hemagglutinin
(HA) and neuraminidase (NA) gene phylogenies that represent ancestors to diverse 
H5N1 virus clades. By using the same methods that have been used to generate
currently licensed inactivated H5N1 vaccines, we were able to produce a panel of 
replication competent influenza viruses containing synthesized HA and NA genes
representing the reconstructed ancestral proteins. We identified two of these
viruses that showed promising in vitro cross-reactivity with clade 1, 2.1, 2.2,
2.3.4, and 4 viruses. To confirm that vaccine antigens derived from these viruses
were able to elicit functional antibodies following immunization, we created
whole-virus vaccines and compared their protective efficacy versus that of
antigens from positive control, naturally occurring, and broadly reactive H5N1
viruses. The ancestral viruses' vaccines provided robust protection against
morbidity and mortality in ferrets challenged with H5N1 strains from clades 1,
2.1, and 2.2 in a manner similar to those based on the control strains. These
findings provide proof of principle that viable, computationally derived vaccine 
seed viruses can be constructed within the context of currently licensed vaccine 
platforms. Such technologies should be explored to enhance the cross reactivity
and availability of H5N1 influenza vaccines.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1012457108 
PMCID: PMC3017181
PMID: 21173241  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23458714

1. Antiviral Res. 2013 May;98(2):297-304. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.02.013. Epub
2013 Feb 28.

Antiviral resistance among highly pathogenic influenza A (H5N1) viruses isolated 
worldwide in 2002-2012 shows need for continued monitoring.

Govorkova EA(1), Baranovich T, Seiler P, Armstrong J, Burnham A, Guan Y, Peiris
M, Webby RJ, Webster RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38105-3678, USA.

Highly pathogenic (HP) H5N1 influenza viruses are evolving pathogens with the
potential to cause sustained human-to-human transmission and pandemic virus
spread. Specific antiviral drugs can play an important role in the early stages
of a pandemic, but the emergence of drug-resistant variants can limit control
options. The available data on the susceptibility of HP H5N1 influenza viruses to
neuraminidase (NA) inhibitors and adamantanes is scarce, and there is no
extensive analysis. Here, we systematically examined the prevalence of NA
inhibitor and adamantane resistance among HP H5N1 influenza viruses that
circulated worldwide during 2002-2012. The phenotypic fluorescence-based assay
showed that both human and avian HP H5N1 viruses are susceptible to NA inhibitors
oseltamivir and zanamivir with little variability over time and ∼5.5-fold less
susceptibility to oseltamivir of viruses of hemagglutinin (HA) clade 2 than of
clade 1. Analysis of available sequence data revealed a low incidence of NA
inhibitor-resistant variants. The established markers of NA inhibitor resistance 
(E119A, H274Y, and N294S, N2 numbering) were found in 2.4% of human and 0.8% of
avian isolates, and the markers of reduced susceptibility (I117V, K150N,
I222V/T/K, and S246N) were found in 0.8% of human and 2.9% of avian isolates. The
frequency of amantadine-resistant variants was higher among human (62.2%) than
avian (31.6%) viruses with disproportionate distribution among different HA
clades. As in human isolates, avian H5N1 viruses carry double L26I and S31N M2
mutations more often than a single S31N mutation. Overall, both human and avian
HP H5N1 influenza viruses are susceptible to NA inhibitors; some proportion is
still susceptible to amantadine in contrast to ∼100% amantadine resistance among 
currently circulating seasonal human H1N1 and H3N2 viruses. Continued antiviral
susceptibility monitoring of H5N1 viruses is needed to maintain therapeutic
approaches for control of disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.02.013 
PMCID: PMC3648604
PMID: 23458714  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16532371

1. Arch Virol. 2006 Aug;151(8):1615-24. Epub 2006 Mar 13.

Detection of Hong Kong 97-like H5N1 influenza viruses from eggs of Vietnamese
waterfowl.

Li Y(1), Lin Z, Shi J, Qi Q, Deng G, Li Z, Wang X, Tian G, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Influenza Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture Sciences and
National Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, CAAS, Harbin, PR China.

Three H5N1 influenza viruses were isolated from shell washes of duck and goose
eggs confiscated from travelers coming from Vietnam. All eight gene segments of
these viruses share high sequence identity with the H5N1 avian influenza viruses 
that caused outbreaks in poultry and humans in Hong Kong in 1997. Animal studies 
indicate that these isolated viruses are able to replicate in mouse lung and
could be found in the organs of ducks without causing any clinical signs or
death. However, the viruses are highly pathogenic for chickens. Although the
source of these recently isolated Hong Kong 97-like H5N1 viruses is undetermined,
their detection in the egg shell of duck and goose suggests that this particular 
genotype of H5N1 virus may have re-emerged in nature or may have been circulating
continuously.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-006-0738-7 
PMID: 16532371  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16473931

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Feb 21;103(8):2845-50. Epub 2006 Feb 10.

Establishment of multiple sublineages of H5N1 influenza virus in Asia:
implications for pandemic control.

Chen H(1), Smith GJ, Li KS, Wang J, Fan XH, Rayner JM, Vijaykrishna D, Zhang JX, 
Zhang LJ, Guo CT, Cheung CL, Xu KM, Duan L, Huang K, Qin K, Leung YH, Wu WL, Lu
HR, Chen Y, Xia NS, Naipospos TS, Yuen KY, Hassan SS, Bahri S, Nguyen TD, Webster
RG, Peiris JS, Guan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Joint Influenza Research Centre (Shantou University Medical College and Hong
Kong University), Shantou, Guangdong 515031, China.

Preparedness for a possible influenza pandemic caused by highly pathogenic avian 
influenza A subtype H5N1 has become a global priority. The spread of the virus to
Europe and continued human infection in Southeast Asia have heightened pandemic
concern. It remains unknown from where the pandemic strain may emerge; current
attention is directed at Vietnam, Thailand, and, more recently, Indonesia and
China. Here, we report that genetically and antigenically distinct sublineages of
H5N1 virus have become established in poultry in different geographical regions
of Southeast Asia, indicating the long-term endemicity of the virus, and the
isolation of H5N1 virus from apparently healthy migratory birds in southern
China. Our data show that H5N1 influenza virus, has continued to spread from its 
established source in southern China to other regions through transport of
poultry and bird migration. The identification of regionally distinct sublineages
contributes to the understanding of the mechanism for the perpetuation and spread
of H5N1, providing information that is directly relevant to control of the source
of infection in poultry. It points to the necessity of surveillance that is
geographically broader than previously supposed and that includes H5N1 viruses of
greater genetic and antigenic diversity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0511120103 
PMCID: PMC1413830
PMID: 16473931  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18032512

1. J Virol. 2008 Feb;82(3):1146-54. Epub 2007 Nov 21.

A single-amino-acid substitution in the NS1 protein changes the pathogenicity of 
H5N1 avian influenza viruses in mice.

Jiao P(1), Tian G, Li Y, Deng G, Jiang Y, Liu C, Liu W, Bu Z, Kawaoka Y, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, CAAS, 427 Maduan Street, Harbin 150001, 
People's Republic of China.

Erratum in
    J Virol. 2008 Apr;82(8):4190.

In this study, we explored the molecular basis determining the virulence of H5N1 
avian influenza viruses in mammalian hosts by comparing two viruses,
A/Duck/Guangxi/12/03 (DK/12) and A/Duck/Guangxi/27/03 (DK/27), which are
genetically similar but differ in their pathogenicities in mice. To assess the
genetic basis for this difference in virulence, we used reverse genetics to
generate a series of reassortants and mutants of these two viruses. We found that
a single-amino-acid substitution of serine for proline at position 42 (P42S) in
the NS1 protein dramatically increased the virulence of the DK/12 virus in mice, 
whereas the substitution of proline for serine at the same position (S42P)
completely attenuated the DK/27 virus. We further demonstrated that the amino
acid S42 of NS1 is critical for the H5N1 influenza virus to antagonize host cell 
interferon induction and for the NS1 protein to prevent the double-stranded
RNA-mediated activation of the NF-kappaB pathway and the IRF-3 pathway. Our
results indicate that the NS1 protein is critical for the pathogenicity of H5N1
influenza viruses in mammalian hosts and that the amino acid S42 of NS1 plays a
key role in undermining the antiviral immune response of the host cell.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01698-07 
PMCID: PMC2224464
PMID: 18032512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17512143

1. Vet Microbiol. 2007 Oct 6;124(3-4):193-201. Epub 2007 Apr 8.

Characterization of an H5N1 avian influenza virus from Taiwan.

Lee MS(1), Deng MC, Lin YJ, Chang CY, Shieh HK, Shiau JZ, Huang CC.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Health Research Institute, Council of Agriculture, 376 Chung-Cheng
Road, Tamsui, Taipei 251, Taiwan.

In 2003, an avian influenza (AI) virus of H5N1 subtype (A/Duck/China/E319-2/03;
Dk/CHN/E319-2/03) was isolated from a smuggled duck in Kinmen Island of Taiwan.
Phylogenetic analysis and pairwise comparison of nucleotide and amino acid
sequences revealed that the virus displayed high similarity to the H5N1 viruses
circulating in Asia during 2004 and 2005. The hemagglutinin (HA) protein of the
virus contained multiple basic amino acid residues (-RERRRKR-) adjacent to the
cleavage site between the HA1 and HA2 domains, showing the highly pathogenic (HP)
characteristics. The HP phenotype was confirmed by experimental infection of
chickens, which led up to 100% mortality within 24-72h postinfection. The virus
replicated equally well in the majority of organs of the infected chickens with
titers ranging from 10(7.5) to 10(4.7) 50% embryo lethal dose (ELD50) per gram of
tissue. In a mouse model the virus exhibits low pathogenic characteristics with a
lethal infection observed only after applying high inoculating dose (>or=10(7.6) 
ELD50) of the virus. The infectious virus particles were recovered only from the 
pulmonary system including trachea and lungs. Our study suggests that ducks
infected with H5N1 AIV of HPAI pathotype showing no disease signs can carry the
virus silently and that bird smuggling represent a serious risk for H5N1 HPAI
transmission.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2007.04.021 
PMID: 17512143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21310090

1. Virol J. 2011 Feb 11;8:65. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-8-65.

Characterization of a non-pathogenic H5N1 influenza virus isolated from a
migratory duck flying from Siberia in Hokkaido, Japan, in October 2009.

Yamamoto N(1), Sakoda Y, Motoshima M, Yoshino F, Soda K, Okamatsu M, Kida H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Disease Control, Graduate School of Veterinary Medicine,
Hokkaido University, Kita 18, Nishi 9, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-0818,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Infection with H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses
(HPAIVs) of domestic poultry and wild birds has spread to more than 60 countries 
in Eurasia and Africa. It is concerned that HPAIVs may be perpetuated in the
lakes in Siberia where migratory water birds nest in summer. To monitor whether
HPAIVs circulate in migratory water birds, intensive surveillance of avian
influenza has been performed in Mongolia and Japan in autumn each year. Until
2008, there had not been any H5N1 viruses isolated from migratory water birds
that flew from their nesting lakes in Siberia. In autumn 2009,
A/mallard/Hokkaido/24/09 (H5N1) (Mal/Hok/24/09) was isolated from a fecal sample 
of a mallard (Anas platyrhynchos) that flew from Siberia to Hokkaido, Japan. The 
isolate was assessed for pathogenicity in chickens, domestic ducks, and quails
and analyzed antigenically and phylogenetically.
RESULTS: No clinical signs were observed in chickens inoculated intravenously
with Mal/Hok/24/09 (H5N1). There was no viral replication in chickens inoculated 
intranasally with the isolate. None of the domestic ducks and quails inoculated
intranasally with the isolate showed any clinical signs. There were no multiple
basic amino acid residues at the cleavage site of the hemagglutinin (HA) of the
isolate. Each gene of Mal/Hok/24/09 (H5N1) is phylogenetically closely related to
that of influenza viruses isolated from migratory water birds that flew from
their nesting lakes in autumn. Additionally, the antigenicity of the HA of the
isolate was similar to that of the viruses isolated from migratory water birds in
Hokkaido that flew from their northern territory in autumn and different from
those of HPAIVs isolated from birds found dead in China, Mongolia, and Japan on
the way back to their northern territory in spring.
CONCLUSION: Mal/Hok/24/09 (H5N1) is a non-pathogenic avian influenza virus for
chickens, domestic ducks, and quails, and is antigenically and genetically
distinct from the H5N1 HPAIVs prevailing in birds in Eurasia and Africa. H5
viruses with the HA gene of HPAIV had not been isolated from migratory water
birds in the surveillance until 2009, indicating that H5N1 HPAIVs had not become 
dominant in their nesting lakes in Siberia until 2009.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-8-65 
PMCID: PMC3048565
PMID: 21310090  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16318689

1. Emerg Infect Dis. 2005 Oct;11(10):1515-21.

Evolution of H5N1 avian influenza viruses in Asia.

World Health Organization Global Influenza Program Surveillance Network.

An outbreak of highly pathogenic avian influenza A (H5N1) has recently spread to 
poultry in 9 Asian countries. H5N1 infections have caused > or =52 human deaths
in Vietnam, Thailand, and Cambodia from January 2004 to April 2005. Genomic
analyses of H5N1 isolates from birds and humans showed 2 distinct clades with a
nonoverlapping geographic distribution. All the viral genes were of avian
influenza origin, which indicates absence of reassortment with human influenza
viruses. All human H5N1 isolates tested belonged to a single clade and were
resistant to the adamantane drugs but sensitive to neuraminidase inhibitors. Most
H5N1 isolates from humans were antigenically homogeneous and distinct from avian 
viruses circulating before the end of 2003. Some 2005 isolates showed evidence of
antigenic drift. An updated nonpathogenic H5N1 reference virus, lacking the
polybasic cleavage site in the hemagglutinin gene, was produced by reverse
genetics in anticipation of the possible need to vaccinate humans.

DOI: 10.3201/eid1110.050644 
PMCID: PMC3366754
PMID: 16318689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24655395

1. Emerg Infect Dis. 2014 Apr;20(4):542-51. doi: 10.3201/eid2004.131295.

Active surveillance for avian influenza virus, Egypt, 2010-2012.

Kayali G, Kandeil A, El-Shesheny R, Kayed AS, Gomaa MM, Maatouq AM, Shehata MM,
Moatasim Y, Bagato O, Cai Z, Rubrum A, Kutkat MA, McKenzie PP, Webster RG, Webby 
RJ, Ali MA.

Continuous circulation of influenza A(H5N1) virus among poultry in Egypt has
created an epicenter in which the viruses evolve into newer subclades and
continue to cause disease in humans. To detect influenza viruses in Egypt, since 
2009 we have actively surveyed various regions and poultry production sectors.
From August 2010 through January 2013, >11,000 swab samples were collected; 10%
were positive by matrix gene reverse transcription PCR. During this period,
subtype H9N2 viruses emerged, cocirculated with subtype H5N1 viruses, and
frequently co-infected the same avian host. Genetic and antigenic analyses of
viruses revealed that influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.2.1 viruses are dominant and that
all subtype H9N2 viruses are G1-like. Cocirculation of different subtypes poses
concern for potential reassortment. Avian influenza continues to threaten public 
and animal health in Egypt, and continuous surveillance for avian influenza virus
is needed.

DOI: 10.3201/eid2004.131295 
PMCID: PMC3966394
PMID: 24655395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11878904

1. Virology. 2002 Jan 5;292(1):16-23.

H5N1 influenza viruses isolated from geese in Southeastern China: evidence for
genetic reassortment and interspecies transmission to ducks.

Guan Y(1), Peiris M, Kong KF, Dyrting KC, Ellis TM, Sit T, Zhang LJ, Shortridge
KF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of Hong Kong, University Pathology 
Building, Hong Kong SAR, People's Republic of China.

The H5N1 viruses (H5N1/97) associated with the "bird-flu" incident in the Hong
Kong SAR have not been isolated since the slaughter of poultry in December 1997
brought that outbreak to an end. Recent evidence points to this virus as having
arisen through a reassortment of a number of precursor avian viruses and a virus 
related to Goose/Guangdong/1/96 (H5N1) (Gs/Gd/96) was the likely donor of the H5 
hemagglutinin. We characterize the Goose/Guangdong/1/96-like viruses isolated
from geese and ducks imported into Hong Kong in the year 2000. Antigenically and 
genetically, these recent H5N1 viruses fall into two groups, one mainly
associated with geese, and the other, recently transmitted to ducks. Further,
viruses isolated from a goose and a duck in December 2000 have acquired NS, PA,
M, and PB2 genes from the aquatic avian influenza gene pool through reassortment.
For pandemic preparedness, it is important to monitor whether these reassortant
viruses have the capacity for interspecies transmission to terrestrial poultry or
mammals.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.2001.1207 
PMID: 11878904  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18172752

1. Virus Genes. 2008 Feb;36(1):117-25. doi: 10.1007/s11262-007-0188-7. Epub 2008 Jan
3.

Genetic characterization of the NS gene indicates co-circulation of two
sub-lineages of highly pathogenic avian influenza virus of H5N1 subtype in
Northern Europe in 2006.

Zohari S(1), Gyarmati P, Thorén P, Czifra G, Bröjer C, Belák S, Berg M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Joint Research and Development in Virology, National
Veterinary Institute (SVA), Ulls väg 2B, 751 89 Uppsala, Sweden
siamak.zohari@sva.se

The non-structural (NS) gene of highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses of the 
H5N1 subtype (HPAI-H5N1) isolated in Baltic Sea area of Sweden in 2006 was
studied. The phylogenetic analysis data demonstrated that two distinct
sub-lineages of HPAI-H5N1 were circulating during the outbreak in Northern Europe
in Spring 2006. Sub-lineage I viruses fell into the same clade as viruses found
in Denmark and Germany and formed a sub-clade which also included viruses
isolated in the Russian Federation in late 2005. Sub-lineage II viruses formed a 
sub-clade closely related to European, Middle Eastern and African isolates
reported in 2006. Analysis of the inferred amino acid sequences of the NS1
protein showed a deletion of five amino acids at positions 80-84. No viruses
represented in this study contained Glu92 in the NS1 and all isolates contained
the avian-like ESKV amino acid sequences at the NS1 C-terminal end. Sub-lineage I
isolates contained unique substitutions V194I in NS1 and G63E in Nuclear export
protein (NEP).

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-007-0188-7 
PMID: 18172752  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11739677

1. J Virol. 2002 Jan;76(1):118-26.

Characterization of H5N1 influenza viruses that continue to circulate in geese in
southeastern China.

Webster RG(1), Guan Y, Peiris M, Walker D, Krauss S, Zhou NN, Govorkova EA, Ellis
TM, Dyrting KC, Sit T, Perez DR, Shortridge KF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology and Molecular Biology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA. robert.webster@stjude.org

The H5N1 influenza virus, which killed humans and poultry in 1997, was a
reassortant that possibly arose in one type of domestic poultry present in the
live-poultry markets of Hong Kong. Given that all the precursors of H5N1/97 are
still circulating in poultry in southern China, the reassortment event that
generated H5N1 could be repeated. Because A/goose/Guangdong/1/96-like (H5N1;
Go/Gd) viruses are the proposed donors of the hemagglutinin gene of the H5N1
virus, we investigated the continued circulation, host range, and
transmissibility of Go/Gd-like viruses in poultry. The Go/Gd-like viruses caused 
weight loss and death in some mice inoculated with high virus doses. Transmission
of Go/Gd-like H5N1 viruses to geese by contact with infected geese resulted in
infection of all birds but limited signs of overt disease. In contrast, oral
inoculation with high doses of Go/Gd-like viruses resulted in the deaths of up to
50% of infected geese. Transmission from infected geese to chickens occurred only
by fecal contact, whereas transmission to quail occurred by either aerosol or
fecal spread. This difference is probably explained by the higher susceptibility 
of quail to Go/Gd-like virus. The high degree of susceptibility of quail to Go/Gd
(H5N1)-like viruses and the continued circulation of H6N1 and H9N2 viruses in
quail support the hypothesis that quail were the host of origin of the H5N1/97
virus. The ease of transmission of Go/Gd (H5N1)-like viruses to land-based birds,
especially quail, supports the wisdom of separating aquatic and land-based
poultry in the markets in Hong Kong and the need for continued surveillance in
the field and live-bird markets in which different types of poultry are in
contact with one another.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.76.1.118-126.2002 
PMCID: PMC135698
PMID: 11739677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18216109

1. J Virol. 2008 Apr;82(7):3405-14. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02468-07. Epub 2008 Jan 23.

Identification of the progenitors of Indonesian and Vietnamese avian influenza A 
(H5N1) viruses from southern China.

Wang J(1), Vijaykrishna D, Duan L, Bahl J, Zhang JX, Webster RG, Peiris JS, Chen 
H, Smith GJ, Guan Y.

Author information: 
(1)International Institute of Infection and Immunity, Shantou University,
Shantou, Guangdong 515031, China.

The transmission of highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 virus to Southeast
Asian countries triggered the first major outbreak and transmission wave in late 
2003, accelerating the pandemic threat to the world. Due to the lack of influenza
surveillance prior to these outbreaks, the genetic diversity and the transmission
pathways of H5N1 viruses from this period remain undefined. To determine the
possible source of the wave 1 H5N1 viruses, we recently conducted further
sequencing and analysis of samples collected in live-poultry markets from
Guangdong, Hunan, and Yunnan in southern China from 2001 to 2004. Phylogenetic
analysis of the hemagglutinin and neuraminidase genes of 73 H5N1 isolates from
this period revealed a greater genetic diversity in southern China than
previously reported. Moreover, results show that eight viruses isolated from
Yunnan in 2002 and 2003 were most closely related to the clade 1 virus sublineage
from Vietnam, Thailand, and Malaysia, while two viruses from Hunan in 2002 and
2003 were most closely related to viruses from Indonesia (clade 2.1). Further
phylogenetic analyses of the six internal genes showed that all 10 of those
viruses maintained similar phylogenetic relationships as the surface genes. The
10 progenitor viruses were genotype Z and shared high similarity (>/=99%) with
their corresponding descendant viruses in most gene segments. These results
suggest a direct transmission link for H5N1 viruses between Yunnan and Vietnam
and also between Hunan and Indonesia during 2002 and 2003. Poultry trade may be
responsible for virus introduction to Vietnam, while the transmission route from 
Hunan to Indonesia remains unclear.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02468-07 
PMCID: PMC2268469
PMID: 18216109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20335251

1. J Virol. 2010 Jun;84(11):5815-23. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01642-09. Epub 2010 Mar 24.

Geographical spread of highly pathogenic avian influenza virus H5N1 during the
2006 outbreak in Austria.

Fink M(1), Fernández SR, Schobesberger H, Koefer J.

Author information: 
(1)Austrian Agency for Health and Food Safety, Institute for Veterinary Disease
Control, Moedling, Robert Koch Gasse 17, A-2340 Moedling, Austria.
maria.fink@ages.at

In spring 2006, highly pathogenic avian influenza virus (HPAIV) of subtype H5N1
was detected in Austria in 119 dead wild birds. The hemagglutinin cleavage site
showed that the amino acid sequence motif was identical to that of the Qinghai
lineage. For detailed analysis, the hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA)
genes of 27 selected Austrian H5N1 viruses originating from different regions and
wild bird species were analyzed phylogenetically, which revealed two clearly
separated Austrian subclusters, both belonging to European cluster EMA-1.
Subcluster South (SCS) contains virus isolates from the south of Austria as well 
as from Slovenia, Turkey, Egypt, and Nigeria. The second subcluster, Northwest
(SCN), covered a larger group of viruses originating from different locations and
wild bird species in the northern and very western parts of Austria, as well as
from Bavaria and Switzerland. Surprisingly, virus isolates originating from two
mute swans and one wild duck found on the north side of the Alps did not cluster 
with SCN but with SCS. Together with isolates from Bavarian, the Czech Republic, 
Italy, and Slovakia, they form a genuine subgroup, named subgroup Bavaria (SGB). 
This subgroup forms a link to SCN, indicating a spread of the virus from south to
north. There has been a general assumption that the generic HPAI introduction
route into Europe was from Russia to north Germany, introducing cluster EMA-2
into Europe. Interestingly, our findings support the assumption of an alternative
introduction of the HPAI H5N1 virus from Turkey to central Europe, where it
spread as cluster EMA-1 during the outbreak of 2006.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01642-09 
PMCID: PMC2876606
PMID: 20335251  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24880916

1. Virus Genes. 2014 Oct;49(2):278-85. doi: 10.1007/s11262-014-1089-1. Epub 2014 Jun
1.

Genetic characterization of an H5N1 avian influenza virus from a vaccinated duck 
flock in Vietnam.

Bui VN(1), Ogawa H, Trinh DQ, Nguyen TH, Pham NT, Truong DA, Bui AN, Runstadler
J, Imai K, Nguyen KV.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Animal Hygiene and Food Safety, Obihiro University of
Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, 2-11 Inada, Hokkaido, Obihiro, 080-8555,
Japan.

This study reports the genetic characterization of a highly pathogenic avian
influenza virus subtype H5N1 isolated from a moribund domestic duck in central
Vietnam during 2012. In the moribund duck's flock, within 6 days after
vaccination with a commercial H5N1 vaccine (Re-5) to 59-day-old birds, 120 out of
2,000 ducks died. Genetic analysis revealed a substantial number of mutations in 
the HA gene of the isolate in comparison with the vaccine strains, Re-1 and Re-5.
Similar mutations were also found in selected Vietnamese H5N1 strains isolated
since 2009. Mutations in the HA gene involved positions at antigenic sites
associated with antibody binding and also neutralizing epitopes, with some of the
mutations resulting in the modification of N-linked glycosylation of the HA.
Those mutations may be related to the escape of virus from antibody binding and
the infection of poultry, interpretations which may be confirmed through a
reverse genetics approach. The virus also carried an amino acid substitution in
the M2, which conferred a reduced susceptibility to amantadine, but no
neuraminidase inhibitor resistance markers were found in the viral NA gene.
Additional information including vaccination history in the farm and the
surrounding area is needed to fully understand the background of this outbreak.
Such understanding and expanded monitoring of the H5N1 influenza viruses
circulating in Vietnam is an urgent need to provide updated information to
improve effective vaccine strain selection and vaccination protocols, aiding
disease control, and biosecurity to prevent H5N1 infection in both poultry and
humans.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-014-1089-1 
PMID: 24880916  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18789611

1. Vet Microbiol. 2009 Jan 13;133(3):257-63. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2008.07.013. Epub
2008 Jul 30.

Molecular and phylogenetic analysis of the H5N1 avian influenza virus caused the 
first highly pathogenic avian influenza outbreak in poultry in the Czech Republic
in 2007.

Nagy A(1), Vostinakova V, Pindova Z, Hornickova J, Cernikova L, Sedlak K, Mojzis 
M, Dirbakova Z, Machova J.

Author information: 
(1)State Veterinary Institute Prague, National Reference Laboratory for Avian
Influenza and Newcastle Disease, Prague, Czech Republic.
alexander.nagy@svupraha.cz

On 19th July 2007 re-occurrence of the H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza
(HPAI) virus was noticed in Europe. The index strain of this novel H5N1 lineage
was identified in the Czech Republic where it caused historically the first HPAI 
outbreak in commercial poultry. In the present study we performed molecular and
phylogenetic analysis of the index strain of the re-emerging H5N1 virus lineage
along with the Czech and the Slovak H5N1 strains collected in 2006 and
established the evolutionary relationships to additional viruses circulated in
Europe in 2005-2006. Our analysis revealed that the Czech and the Slovak H5N1
viruses collected during 2006 were separated into two sub-clades 2.2.1 and 2.2.2,
which predominated in Europe during 2005-2006. On the contrary the newly emerged 
H5N1 viruses belonged to a clearly distinguishable sub-clade 2.2.3. Within the
sub-clade 2.2.3 the Czech H5N1 strains showed the closest relationships to the
simultaneously circulated viruses from Germany, Romania and Russia (Krasnodar) in
2007 and were further clustered with the viruses from Afghanistan and Mongolia
circulated in 2006. The origin of the Czech 2007 H5N1 HPAI strains was also
discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2008.07.013 
PMID: 18789611  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26627108

1. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 2;5:17508. doi: 10.1038/srep17508.

Genetic and molecular characterization of H9N2 and H5 avian influenza viruses
from live poultry markets in Zhejiang Province, eastern China.

Wu H(1), Peng X(1), Peng X(1), Cheng L(1), Lu X(1), Jin C(1), Xie T(1), Yao H(1),
Wu N(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Diseases, the First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University,
310003 Hangzhou, China.

Live poultry markets (LPMs) are a key source of reassorted avian influenza
viruses (AIVs) because of the density of terrestrial and aquatic poultry and the 
frequency of AIV infection. H9N2 viruses are prevalent in terrestrial poultry
throughout Asia and have been isolated from poultry outbreaks worldwide. They
infect both avian and mammalian species and may be significant donors of genetic 
material to emerging human pathogens. LPMs in Zhejiang Province were surveyed
from 2013-2014 for AIVs. Three hundred seventy-four (374) AIV strains were
isolated from 3,328 samples. Whole-genome sequencing and phylogenetic analyses
were performed. We identified a novel H9N2 virus genotype that had undergone
reassortment with gene segments from Qa/HK/G1/97-like, Ck/BJ/1/94-like, and
Dk/HK/Y439/97-like viruses. Phylogenetic analyses suggested the H9N2 viruses had 
undergone reassortments with other AIV subtypes. The results also suggested that 
two different clades (2.3.2 and 2.3.4.6) of H5 viruses were co-circulating in
Zhejiang Province. Given that reassorted H5 AIVs were detected in geese and
ducks, it is possible that apparently healthy birds contribute to emerging H5
AIVs. Continued surveillance is required in poultry in eastern China.

DOI: 10.1038/srep17508 
PMCID: PMC4667249
PMID: 26627108  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18387755

1. Vet Microbiol. 2008 Aug 25;130(3-4):380-4. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2008.02.006.
Epub 2008 Feb 16.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza virus subtype H5N1 in ducks in the Northern
part of Cameroon.

Njouom R(1), Aubin JT, Bella AL, Demsa BM, Rouquet P, Gake B, Ngangnou A,
Foupouapouognigni Y, Van Der Werf S, Rocourt J, Rousset D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie, Centre Pasteur du Cameroun, Yaounde, Cameroon.
njouom@pasteur-yaounde.org

Highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) virus was first detected in Cameroon in 
February 2006. Analysis of NA sequences of the virus demonstrated that it is
closely related to the H5N1 isolates from Northern Nigeria, Sudan and Ivory
Coast, suggesting a common virus ancestor.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2008.02.006 
PMID: 18387755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16439620

1. Science. 2006 Mar 17;311(5767):1576-80. Epub 2006 Jan 26.

Large-scale sequence analysis of avian influenza isolates.

Obenauer JC(1), Denson J, Mehta PK, Su X, Mukatira S, Finkelstein DB, Xu X, Wang 
J, Ma J, Fan Y, Rakestraw KM, Webster RG, Hoffmann E, Krauss S, Zheng J, Zhang Z,
Naeve CW.

Author information: 
(1)Hartwell Center for Bioinformatics and Biotechnology, St. Jude Children's
Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2006 Mar 17;311(5767):1562-3.
    Science. 2006 Sep 15;313(5793):1573; author reply 1573.

The spread of H5N1 avian influenza viruses (AIVs) from China to Europe has raised
global concern about their potential to infect humans and cause a pandemic. In
spite of their substantial threat to human health, remarkably little AIV
whole-genome information is available. We report here a preliminary analysis of
the first large-scale sequencing of AIVs, including 2196 AIV genes and 169
complete genomes. We combine this new information with public AIV data to
identify new gene alleles, persistent genotypes, compensatory mutations, and a
potential virulence determinant.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1121586 
PMID: 16439620  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26748550

1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2016 Apr;63(2):127-35. doi: 10.1111/tbed.12470. Epub 2016
Jan 8.

Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza Virus A/H5N1 Infection in Vaccinated Meat Duck 
Flocks in the Mekong Delta of Vietnam.

Cuong NV(1), Truc VN(1)(2), Nhung NT(1), Thanh TT(1), Chieu TT(1), Hieu TQ(3),
Men NT(3), Mai HH(3), Chi HT(3), Boni MF(1)(4), van Doorn HR(1)(4), Thwaites
GE(1)(4), Carrique-Mas JJ(1)(4), Hoa NT(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, Wellcome Trust Major Overseas
Programme, Hospital for Tropical Disease, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.
(2)University of Science, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.
(3)Sub-Department of Animal Health, Tien Giang Province, Vietnam.
(4)Centre for Tropical Medicine, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of
Oxford, UK.

We investigated episodes of suspected highly pathogenic avian influenza
(HPAI)-like illness among 12 meat duck flocks in two districts in Tien Giang
province (Mekong Delta, Vietnam) in November 2013. In total, duck samples from 8 
of 12 farms tested positive for HPAI virus subtype A/haemagglutinin 5 and
neuraminidase 1 (H5N1) by real-time RT-PCR. Sequencing results confirmed clade of
2.3.2.1.c as the cause of the outbreaks. Most (7/8) laboratory-confirmed positive
flocks had been vaccinated with inactivated HPAI H5N1 clade 2.3.4 vaccines
<6 days prior to onset of clinical signs. A review of vaccination data in
relation to estimated production in the area suggested that vaccination efforts
were biased towards larger flocks and that vaccination coverage was low [21.2%
ducks vaccinated with two shots (range by district 7.4-34.9%)]. The low-coverage 
data, the experimental evidence of lack of cross-protection conferred by the
currently used vaccines based on clade 2.3.4 together with the short lifespan of 
meat duck flocks (60-70 days), suggest that vaccination is not likely to be
effective as a tool for control of H5N1 infection in meat duck flocks in the
area.

© 2016 The Authors. Transboundary and Emerging Diseases Published by Blackwell
Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.12470 
PMCID: PMC4819680
PMID: 26748550  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20016036

1. J Gen Virol. 2010 Apr;91(Pt 4):949-59. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.017459-0. Epub 2009 Dec
16.

Emergence of H5N1 avian influenza viruses with reduced sensitivity to
neuraminidase inhibitors and novel reassortants in Lao People's Democratic
Republic.

Boltz DA(1), Douangngeun B, Phommachanh P, Sinthasak S, Mondry R, Obert C, Seiler
P, Keating R, Suzuki Y, Hiramatsu H, Govorkova EA, Webster RG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Department of Infectious Diseases, St Jude Children's
Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Pandemic influenza viruses can emerge through continuous evolution and the
acquisition of specific mutations or through reassortment. This study assessed
the pandemic potential of H5N1 viruses isolated from poultry outbreaks occurring 
from July 2006 to September 2008 in the Lao People's Democratic Republic (PDR).
We analyzed 29 viruses isolated from chickens and ducks and two from fatal human 
cases in 2007. Prior to 2008, all H5N1 isolates in Lao PDR were from clade 2.3.4;
however, clade 2.3.2 was introduced in September 2008. Of greatest concern was
the circulation of three isolates that showed reduced sensitivity to the
neuraminidase (NA) inhibitor oseltamivir in an enzyme inhibition assay, each with
different NA mutations - V116A, I222L and K150N, and a previously unreported
S246N mutation. In addition, six isolates had an S31N mutation in the M2 protein,
which conferred resistance to amantadine not previously reported in clade 2.3.4
viruses. Two H5N1 reassortants were isolated whose polymerase genes, PB1 and PB2,
were homologous to those of Eurasian viruses giving rise to a novel H5N1
genotype, genotype P. All H5N1 viruses retained avian-like receptor specificity, 
but four had altered affinities for alpha2,3-linked sialic acid. This study shows
that, in a genetically similar population of H5N1 viruses in Lao PDR, mutants
emerged with natural resistance to antivirals and altered affinities for
alpha2,3-linked sialic acids, together with reassortants with polymerase genes
homologous to Eurasian viruses. These changes may contribute to the emergence of 
a pandemic influenza strain and are critical in devising surveillance strategies.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.017459-0 
PMCID: PMC2888158
PMID: 20016036  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18031958

1. Vet Microbiol. 2008 Apr 30;128(3-4):243-52. Epub 2007 Oct 18.

Phylogenetic analyses of highly pathogenic avian influenza virus isolates from
Germany in 2006 and 2007 suggest at least three separate introductions of H5N1
virus.

Starick E(1), Beer M, Hoffmann B, Staubach C, Werner O, Globig A, Strebelow G,
Grund C, Durban M, Conraths FJ, Mettenleiter T, Harder T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Diagnostic Virology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institute, 17493
Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany.

In spring 2006, highly pathogenic avian influenza virus (HPAIV) of subtype H5N1
was detected in Germany in 343 dead wild birds, as well as in a black swan
(Cygnus atratus) kept in a zoo, three stray cats, one stone marten (Martes
foina), and in a single turkey farm. In 2007 (June-July) the virus reoccurred in 
96 wild birds at six geographically separate locations in the Southeast of
Germany. In addition, a backyard mixed duck and goose holding was affected.
Real-time RT-PCR [Hoffmann, B., Harder, T., Starick, E., Depner, K., Werner, O., 
Beer, M., 2007. Rapid and highly sensitive pathotyping of avian influenza A H5N1 
virus by using real-time reverse transcription-PCR. J. Clin. Microbiol. 45,
600-603] and nucleotide sequencing confirmed that these H5-viruses belonged to
the Qinghai lineage of HPAIV H5N1 (clade 2.2). For a more detailed analysis, the 
hemagglutinin and neuraminidase genes of 27 selected German H5N1 viruses isolated
2006 or 2007 and originating from different regions and animal species were
sequenced and analysed phylogenetically. As a result, three closely related but
distinguishable H5N1 subclades could be defined: In 2006 a 'Northern type'
(subclade 2.2.2), representing virus isolates from the German federal states
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Schleswig-Holstein, Brandenburg, and Lower Saxony,
and a 'Southern type' (subclade 2.2.1) from Baden-Württemberg and Bavaria were
detected. Interestingly, representatives of both types were present in Central
Germany and caused the outbreak in turkeys (subclade 2.2.2) and in a case in a
tufted duck (Aythya fuligula) (subclade 2.2.1) in Saxony. Furthermore, one
isolate from the South of Germany was identified as 2.2.2 and vice versa a
2.2.1-like isolate was found in Northern Germany. H5N1 viruses isolated in 2007
belonged to a third type (subclade 2.2.3) which was not detected in 2006. Our
data suggest the introduction of three distinct H5N1 variants into the wild bird 
population of Germany. The source of these viruses and the exact time of
introduction remain obscure. Based on the identification of closely related H5N1 
viruses from Southern and Central Russia, a recent introduction via wild birds on
winter escape from these regions, early in 2006 constitutes the most likely
scenario for the 2006 outbreaks. The viruses detected in 2007 most likely
represent another new incursion from an as yet unknown source.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2007.10.012 
PMID: 18031958  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25604926

1. J Gen Virol. 2015 May;96(Pt 5):975-981. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.000056. Epub 2015 Jan 
20.

Two novel reassortants of avian influenza A (H5N6) virus in China.

Bi Y(1)(2), Mei K(3)(4), Shi W(5), Liu D(1)(2), Yu X(3), Gao Z(4), Zhao L(4), Gao
GF(2)(4)(6)(7)(1), Chen J(4)(1), Chen Q(4)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Influenza Research and Early-warning (CASCIRE), Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing 100101, PR China.
(2)CAS Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology (CASPMI),
Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, PR China.
(3)Hubei University, Hubei 430062, PR China.
(4)CAS Key Laboratory of Special Pathogens and Biosafety, Wuhan Institute of
Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hubei 430071, PR China.
(5)Institute of Pathogen Biology, Taishan Medical College, Shandong 271016, PR
China.
(6)Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Disease, Zhejiang University, Hanzhou 310003, PR China.
(7)Office of Director-General, Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention 
(China CDC), Beijing 102206, PR China.

Eight avian influenza A (H5N6) viruses were isolated from live poultry markets
(LPMs) in Sichuan and Jiangxi Provinces in China in 2014, including those close
to the county where the human H5N6 infection occurred. Genetic and phylogenetic
analyses revealed that these H5N6 viruses were novel reassortants between H5N1
clade 2.3.4 and H6N6 viruses, and had evolved into two distinct lineages (Sichuan
and Jiangxi). Moreover, the human H5N6 virus was closely related to the
avian-source viruses of Sichuan lineage. Notably, H5N6 viruses contained a T160A 
substitution in the haemagglutinin protein and an 11 aa deletion in the
neuraminidase stalk, which may aid in enhancing viral affinity for human-like
receptors and virulence in mammals. As the H5N1 virus infects humans through
direct contact, infection with the novel H5N6 virus raised significant concerns
that the H5 subtype was a likely candidate for a pandemic. Therefore, extensive
and long-term surveillance of avian influenza viruses in LPMs is essential.

© 2015 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.000056 
PMID: 25604926  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23921843

1. Viruses. 2013 Aug 5;5(8):1964-77. doi: 10.3390/v5081964.

Avian influenza: mixed infections and missing viruses.

Lindsay LL(1), Kelly TR, Plancarte M, Schobel S, Lin X, Dugan VG, Wentworth DE,
Boyce WM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, University of
California, One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616, USA. lllindsay@ucdavis.edu

A high prevalence and diversity of avian influenza (AI) viruses were detected in 
a population of wild mallards sampled during summer 2011 in California, providing
an opportunity to compare results obtained before and after virus culture. We
tested cloacal swab samples prior to culture by matrix real-time PCR, and by
amplifying and sequencing a 640bp portion of the hemagglutinin (HA) gene. Each
sample was also inoculated into embryonated chicken eggs, and full genome
sequences were determined for cultured viruses. While low matrix Ct values were a
good predictor of virus isolation from eggs, samples with high or undetectable Ct
values also yielded isolates. Furthermore, a single passage in eggs altered the
occurrence and detection of viral strains, and mixed infections (different HA
subtypes) were detected less frequently after culture. There is no gold standard 
or perfect reference comparison for surveillance of unknown viruses, and true
negatives are difficult to distinguish from false negatives. This study showed
that sequencing samples prior to culture increases the detection of mixed
infections and enhances the identification of viral strains and sequences that
may have changed or even disappeared during culture.

DOI: 10.3390/v5081964 
PMCID: PMC3761236
PMID: 23921843  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22212904

1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2012 Oct;59(5):460-3. doi:
10.1111/j.1865-1682.2011.01297.x. Epub 2011 Dec 28.

New introduction of clade 2.3.2.1 avian influenza virus (H5N1) into Bangladesh.

Islam MR(1), Haque ME, Giasuddin M, Chowdhury EH, Samad MA, Parvin R, Nooruzzaman
M, Rahman MM, Monoura P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Bangladesh
Agricultural University, Mymensingh, Bangladesh. mrislam_bau@yahoo.com

Since the first outbreak of highly pathogenic H5N1 avian inafluenza (HPAI) in
Bangladesh in February 2007, a total of 519 disease events have been reported
till 22 October 2011. Partial HA gene sequences of 11 selected H5N1 HPAI isolates
of 2007 to 2011 were determined and subjected to phylogenetic analysis. The study
revealed a recent introduction of clade 2.3.2 and 2.3.4 viruses into Bangladesh
in 2011 in addition to clade 2.2 viruses that had been in circulation since 2007.
Clade 2.3.2 virus isolates from Bangladesh are phylogenetically related to the
newly designated clade 2.3.2.1 viruses, reported recently from Asia and Eastern
Europe.

© 2011 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1865-1682.2011.01297.x 
PMID: 22212904  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18675524

1. Vet Microbiol. 2009 Jan 1;133(1-2):65-74. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2008.06.020. Epub
2008 Jul 5.

Pathogenicity of highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses of H5N1 subtype
isolated in Thailand for different poultry species.

Saito T(1), Watanabe C, Takemae N, Chaisingh A, Uchida Y, Buranathai C, Suzuki H,
Okamatsu M, Imada T, Parchariyanon S, Traiwanatam N, Yamaguchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Research Team for Zoonotic Diseases, National Institute of Animal Health,
National Agriculture and Food Organization (NARO), 3-1-5 Kannondai, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki 305-0856, Japan. taksaito@affrc.go.jp

Highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) viruses of the H5N1 subtype have caused 
several rounds of outbreaks in Thailand. In this study, we used 3 HPAI viruses
isolated in Thailand in January 2004 from chicken, quail, and duck for genetic
and pathogenetic studies. Sequence analysis of the entire genomes of these
isolates revealed that they were genetically similar to each other. Chickens,
quails, domestic ducks, and cross-bred ducks were inoculated with these isolates 
to evaluate their pathogenicity to different host species.
A/chicken/Yamaguchi/7/04 (H5N1), an HPAI virus isolated in Japan, was also used
in the chicken and quail studies for comparison. All four isolates were shown to 
be highly pathogenic to chickens and quails, with 100% mortality by 10(6) EID50
inoculants of the viruses. They caused sudden death in chickens and quails within
2-4 days after inoculation. The mean death times (MDT) of quails infected with
the Thai isolates were shorter than those of chickens infected with the same
isolates. Mortality against domestic and cross-bred ducks ranged from 50 to 75%
by intranasal inoculation with the 10(6) EID50 viruses. Neurological symptoms
were observed in most of the inoculated domestic ducks and appeared less severe
in the cross-bred ducks. The MDTs of the ducks infected with the Thai isolates
were 4.8-6 days post-inoculation. Most of the surviving ducks infected with the
Thai isolates had sero-converted until 14 dpi. Our study illustrated the
pathobiology of the Thai isolates against different poultry species and would
provide useful information for improving control strategies against HPAI.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2008.06.020 
PMID: 18675524  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15241415

1. Nature. 2004 Jul 8;430(6996):209-13.

Genesis of a highly pathogenic and potentially pandemic H5N1 influenza virus in
eastern Asia.

Li KS(1), Guan Y, Wang J, Smith GJ, Xu KM, Duan L, Rahardjo AP, Puthavathana P,
Buranathai C, Nguyen TD, Estoepangestie AT, Chaisingh A, Auewarakul P, Long HT,
Hanh NT, Webby RJ, Poon LL, Chen H, Shortridge KF, Yuen KY, Webster RG, Peiris
JS.

Author information: 
(1)Joint Influenza Research Centre (SUMC & HKU), Shantou University Medical
College, Shantou, Guangdong 515031, China.

A highly pathogenic avian influenza virus, H5N1, caused disease outbreaks in
poultry in China and seven other east Asian countries between late 2003 and early
2004; the same virus was fatal to humans in Thailand and Vietnam. Here we
demonstrate a series of genetic reassortment events traceable to the precursor of
the H5N1 viruses that caused the initial human outbreak in Hong Kong in 1997
(refs 2-4) and subsequent avian outbreaks in 2001 and 2002 (refs 5, 6). These
events gave rise to a dominant H5N1 genotype (Z) in chickens and ducks that was
responsible for the regional outbreak in 2003-04. Our findings indicate that
domestic ducks in southern China had a central role in the generation and
maintenance of this virus, and that wild birds may have contributed to the
increasingly wide spread of the virus in Asia. Our results suggest that H5N1
viruses with pandemic potential have become endemic in the region and are not
easily eradicable. These developments pose a threat to public and veterinary
health in the region and potentially the world, and suggest that long-term
control measures are required.

DOI: 10.1038/nature02746 
PMID: 15241415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22843856

1. J Virol. 2012 Aug;86(16):8894-5. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01243-12.

Complete genomic sequence of an H5N1 influenza virus from a parrot in southern
China.

Jiao P(1), Song Y, Yuan R, Wei L, Cao L, Luo K, Liao M.

Author information: 
(1)MOA Key Laboratory for Animal Vaccine Development, College of Veterinary
Medicine, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, China.

An H5N1 avian influenza virus (AIV) designated A/Parrot/Guangdong/C99/2005 (H5N1)
was first isolated from a sick parrot in Guangdong in southern China in 2005. The
complete genome of this strain was analyzed. Genome sequence analysis showed that
all 8 gene segments of the virus nucleotide had 99.0% homology to
A/chicken/Henan/12/2004 (H5N1). Phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that all 8
gene segments of the virus were derived from the Eurasian lineage. The
availability of genome sequences is useful to investigate the host range and
genetic evolution of the H5N1 avian influenza virus in Southern China.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01243-12 
PMCID: PMC3421740
PMID: 22843856  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17662125

1. Virol J. 2007 Jul 27;4:77.

Experimental infection of H5N1 HPAI in BALB/c mice.

Evseenko VA(1), Bukin EK, Zaykovskaya AV, Sharshov KA, Ternovoi VA, Ignatyev GM, 
Shestopalov AM.

Author information: 
(1)State Research Center of Virology and Biotechnology Vector of Rospotrebnadzor,
Koltsovo, Russia. vasily.evseenko@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: In 2005 huge epizooty of H5N1 HPAI occurred in Russia. It had been
clear that territory of Russia becoming endemic for H5N1 HPAI. In 2006 several
outbreaks have occurred. To develop new vaccines and antiviral therapies, animal 
models had to be investigated. We choose highly pathogenic strain for these
studies.
RESULTS: A/duck/Tuva/01/06 belongs to Quinghai-like group viruses. Molecular
markers-cleavage site, K627 in PB2 characterize this virus as highly pathogenic. 
This data was confirmed by direct pathogenic tests: IVPI = 3.0, MLD50 =
1,4Log10EID50. Also molecular analysis showed sensitivity of the virus to
adamantanes and neuraminidase inhibitors. Serological analysis showed wide
cross-reactivity of this virus with sera produced to H5N1 HPAI viruses isolated
earlier in South-East Asia. Mean time to death of infected animals was
8,19+/-0,18 days. First time acute delayed hemorrhagic syndrome was observed in
mice lethal model. Hypercytokinemia was determined by elevated sera levels of
IFN-gamma, IL-6, IL-10.
CONCLUSION: Assuming all obtained data we can conclude that basic model
parameters were characterized and virus A/duck/Tuva/01/06 can be used to evaluate
anti-influenza vaccines and therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-4-77 
PMCID: PMC1973068
PMID: 17662125  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19464724

1. Virology. 2009 Jul 20;390(1):13-21. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.04.024. Epub 2009
May 23.

Phylogenetic characterization of H5N1 avian influenza viruses isolated in
Indonesia from 2003-2007.

Takano R(1), Nidom CA, Kiso M, Muramoto Y, Yamada S, Sakai-Tagawa Y, Macken C,
Kawaoka Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of 
Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639,
Japan.

The wide distribution of H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses is a
global threat to human health. Indonesia has had the largest number of human
infections and fatalities caused by these viruses. To understand the enzootic
conditions of the viruses in Indonesia, twenty-four H5N1 viruses isolated from
poultry from 2003 to 2007 were phylogenetically characterized. Although previous 
studies exclusively classified the Indonesian viruses into clades 2.1.1-2.1.3,
our phylogenetic analyses showed a new sublineage that did not belong to any of
the present clades. In addition, novel reassortant viruses were identified that
emerged between this new sublineage and other clades in 2005-2006 on Java Island.
H5N1 viruses were introduced from Java Island to Sulawesi, Kalimantan, and
Sumatra Island on multiple occasions from 2003-2007, causing the geographical
expansion of these viruses in Indonesia. These findings identify Java Island as
the epicenter of the Indonesian H5N1 virus expansion.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.04.024 
PMCID: PMC2861581
PMID: 19464724  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17075062

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Nov 7;103(45):16936-41. Epub 2006 Oct 30.

Emergence and predominance of an H5N1 influenza variant in China.

Smith GJ(1), Fan XH, Wang J, Li KS, Qin K, Zhang JX, Vijaykrishna D, Cheung CL,
Huang K, Rayner JM, Peiris JS, Chen H, Webster RG, Guan Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Emerging Infectious Diseases, Department of
Microbiology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, 21
Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong Kong Special Administration Region, China.

The development of highly pathogenic avian H5N1 influenza viruses in poultry in
Eurasia accompanied with the increase in human infection in 2006 suggests that
the virus has not been effectively contained and that the pandemic threat
persists. Updated virological and epidemiological findings from our market
surveillance in southern China demonstrate that H5N1 influenza viruses continued 
to be panzootic in different types of poultry. Genetic and antigenic analyses
revealed the emergence and predominance of a previously uncharacterized H5N1
virus sublineage (Fujian-like) in poultry since late 2005. Viruses from this
sublineage gradually replaced those multiple regional distinct sublineages and
caused recent human infection in China. These viruses have already transmitted to
Hong Kong, Laos, Malaysia, and Thailand, resulting in a new transmission and
outbreak wave in Southeast Asia. Serological studies suggest that H5N1
seroconversion in market poultry is low and that vaccination may have facilitated
the selection of the Fujian-like sublineage. The predominance of this virus over 
a large geographical region within a short period directly challenges current
disease control measures.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0608157103 
PMCID: PMC1636557
PMID: 17075062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20432047

1. Arch Virol. 2010 Jul;155(7):1145-50. doi: 10.1007/s00705-010-0676-2. Epub 2010
Apr 30.

Genetic and biological characterization of avian influenza H5N1 viruses isolated 
from wild birds and poultry in Western Siberia.

Sharshov K(1), Romanovskaya A, Uzhachenko R, Durymanov A, Zaykovskaya A, Kurskaya
O, Ilinykh P, Silko N, Kulak M, Alekseev A, Zolotykh S, Shestopalov A, Drozdov I.

Author information: 
(1)FSRI SRC VB Vector, Novosibirsk, Russia. sharshov@yandex.ru

Three viruses included in the study were isolated from dead birds
(A/duck/Omsk/1822/2006, A/chicken/Reshoty/02/2006, and A/duck/Tuva/01/2006),
whereas the virus A/common gull/Chany/P/2006 was isolated from an apparently
healthy gull during outbreaks of highly pathogenic avian influenza in Russia in
2006. The intravenous pathogenicity index (IVPI) of viruses
A/duck/Omsk/1822/2006, A/chicken/Reshoty/02/2006, and A/duck/Tuva/01/2006 ranged 
from 2.7 to 3.0, while the virus A/common gull/Chany/P/2006 had a markedly lower 
IVPI of 1.7. The virus A/common gull/Chany/P/2006 had a unique pattern of six
amino acid substitutions in the regions of viral proteins crucial for virulence
of H5N1 viruses. We hypothesize that these substitutions may affect the
pathogenicity of A/common gull/Chany/P/2006.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-010-0676-2 
PMID: 20432047  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15671756

1. Viral Immunol. 2004;17(4):588-93.

Single-step multiplex reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
for influenza A virus subtype H5N1 detection.

Payungporn S(1), Phakdeewirot P, Chutinimitkul S, Theamboonlers A, Keawcharoen J,
Oraveerakul K, Amonsin A, Poovorawan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence in Viral Hepatitis Research Unit, Faculty of Medicine,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Influenza A virus subtype H5N1 causes a rapidly fatal systemic disease in
domestic poultry and spreads directly from poultry to humans. The aim of this
study was to develop a rapid, cost-saving and effective method for influenza A
virus subtype H5N1 detection. The selected primer set was used in single-step
RT-PCR for simultaneous detection in multiplex format of the 276-, 189-, and
131-bp fragments, corresponding to sequences specific for M, H5 and N1. The
amplified DNA fragments were clearly separated by agarose gel electrophoresis.
The sensitivity of this assay was about 10(3) copies/microL. Moreover, this
method can be applied to detect not only avian but also human influenza A virus
subtype H5N1. In conclusion, the highlights of this particular method are its
rapidity and cost-effectiveness, thus rendering it feasible and attractive for
large-scale screening at times of influenza A virus subtype H5N1 outbreak.

DOI: 10.1089/vim.2004.17.588 
PMID: 15671756  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18787938

1. Virus Genes. 2008 Dec;37(3):407-13. doi: 10.1007/s11262-008-0285-2. Epub 2008 Sep
12.

Phylogenetic characterization of H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses
isolated in Switzerland in 2006.

Hofmann MA(1), Renzullo S, Baumer A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology and Immunoprophylaxis, CH-3147, Mittelhaeusern,
Switzerland. martin.hofmann@ivi.admin.ch

In the winter 2005/2006 H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza virus (HPAIV)
reached Western Europe and caused numerous deaths primarily in migratory water
birds. Between February and April 2006 34 cases of H5N1 HPAIV-infected dead water
fowl were identified in Switzerland, almost exclusively occurring in the Lake
Constance area, a large overwintering area for migratory birds in the eastern
part of the country. In total, 13 of these virus isolates were genetically
characterized in the present study by full-length nucleotide sequence analysis of
the hemagglutinin and neuraminidase-coding region. All viruses could be confirmed
as HPAIV based on the amino acid sequence of their hemagglutinin cleavage site.
Phylogenetic analysis revealed that all the virus isolates were highly similar to
each other and to other H5N1 strains found in neighboring countries. All analyzed
Swiss virus isolates belonged to the influenza virus subclade 2.2.1.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-008-0285-2 
PMID: 18787938  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16007072

1. Nature. 2005 Jul 14;436(7048):191-2.

Avian flu: H5N1 virus outbreak in migratory waterfowl.

Chen H(1), Smith GJ, Zhang SY, Qin K, Wang J, Li KS, Webster RG, Peiris JS, Guan 
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Joint Influenza Research Center (SUMC and HKU), Shantou University Medical
College, Shantou 515031, China.

DOI: 10.1038/nature03974 
PMID: 16007072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15717120

1. Arch Virol. 2005 Jun;150(6):1257-66. Epub 2005 Feb 18.

Genetic characterization of H5N1 avian influenza viruses isolated in southern
China during the 2003-04 avian influenza outbreaks.

Wan XF(1), Ren T, Luo KJ, Liao M, Zhang GH, Chen JD, Cao WS, Li Y, Jin NY, Xu D, 
Xin CA.

Author information: 
(1)Digital Biology Laboratory, Department of Computer Science, University of
Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.

The recent H5N1 avian influenza outbreaks in Asia spread over more than 8
countries. It has caused enormous economic loss and grand challenges for the
public health. During these breakouts we isolated three strains of H5N1 Avian
Influenza Virus (AIV) from chickens and one from duck in different farms of
Southern China. We completely sequenced these four AIVs. Molecular
characterization demonstrated that these strains retain the reported H5N1 AIV
sequence properties relevant to virus virulence and host adaptation. Phylogeny
results demonstrated that three of these isolates (except
A/Chicken/Guangdong/174/04) were closely linked to other H5N1 AIVs isolated from 
the recent H5N1 outbreaks in Asia. Six of 8 segments (except PA and M) of
A/Chicken/Guangdong/174/04 also shares a close linkage to other H5N1 AIVs
isolated from the recent H5N1 outbreaks. However, the PA gene of
A/Chicken/Guangdong/174/04 and another H5N1 strain forms a distinct subgroup
along with an H6N1 AIV, and the M gene of A/Chicken/Guangdong/174/04 shows a
close linkage to some H5N1 AIVs from aquatic species in China. Our findings
suggest that a new genotype of AIV (in addition to previous reported ones) was
present during the 2003-04 Asian bird flu outbreaks and that continuing virus
surveillance of AIVs be conducted to monitor the evolutionary paths of the
A/Chicken/Guangdong/174/04-like AIVs.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-004-0474-9 
PMID: 15717120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22363750

1. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31844. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031844. Epub 2012 Feb 20.

Avian influenza (H5N1) virus of clade 2.3.2 in domestic poultry in India.

Nagarajan S(1), Tosh C, Smith DK, Peiris JS, Murugkar HV, Sridevi R, Kumar M,
Katare M, Jain R, Syed Z, Behera P, Cheung CL, Khandia R, Tripathi S, Guan Y,
Dubey SC.

Author information: 
(1)High Security Animal Disease Laboratory, Indian Veterinary Research Institute,
Anand Nagar, Bhopal, India. nagavetbio@gmail.com

South Asia has experienced regular outbreaks of H5N1 avian influenza virus since 
its first detection in India and Pakistan in February, 2006. Till 2009, the
outbreaks in this region were due to clade 2.2 H5N1 virus. In 2010, Nepal
reported the first outbreak of clade 2.3.2 virus in South Asia. In February 2011,
two outbreaks of H5N1 virus were reported in the State of Tripura in India. The
antigenic and genetic analyses of seven H5N1 viruses isolated during these
outbreaks were carried out. Antigenic analysis confirmed 64 to 256-fold reduction
in cross reactivity compared with clade 2.2 viruses. The intravenous
pathogenicity index of the isolates ranged from 2.80-2.95 indicating high
pathogenicity to chickens. Sequencing of all the eight gene-segments of seven
H5N1 viruses isolated in these outbreaks was carried out. The predicted amino
acid sequence analysis revealed high pathogenicity to chickens and susceptibility
to the antivirals, amantadine and oseltamivir. Phylogenetic analyses indicated
that these viruses belong to clade 2.3.2.1 and were distinct to the clade 2.3.2.1
viruses isolated in Nepal. Identification of new clade 2.3.2 H5N1 viruses in
South Asia is reminiscent of the introduction of clade 2.2 viruses in this region
in 2006/7. It is now important to monitor whether the clade 2.3.2.1 is replacing 
clade 2.2 in this region or co-circulating with it. Continued co-circulation of
various subclades of the H5N1 virus which are more adapted to land based poultry 
in a highly populated region such as South Asia increases the risk of evolution
of pandemic H5N1 strains.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031844 
PMCID: PMC3282738
PMID: 22363750  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24993865

1. Virus Genes. 2014 Oct;49(2):223-32. doi: 10.1007/s11262-014-1084-6. Epub 2014 Jul
4.

Characterization of the amantadine-resistant H5N1 highly pathogenic avian
influenza variants isolated from quails in Southern China.

Dong G(1), Luo J, Zhou K, Wu B, Peng C, Ji G, He H.

Author information: 
(1)College of Global Change and Earth System Science, Beijing Normal University, 
Beijing, 100875, China.

Highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza viruses have spread in poultry and wild
birds in Asia, Europe, and Africa since 2003. To evaluate the role of quails in
the evolution of influenza A virus, we characterized three H5N1 viruses isolated 
from quails (QA viruses) in southern China. Phylogenetic analysis indicated that 
three QA viruses derived from the A/goose/Guangdong/1/96-like lineage and most
closely related to HA clade 4 A/chicken/Hong Kong/31.4/02-like viruses. Molecular
analysis suggested that QA viruses and clade 4 H5N1 viruses carried consistent
residue signatures, such as the characteristic M2 Ser31Asn amantadine-resistance 
mutation, implying a common origin of these viruses. As revealed by viral
pathogenicity tests, these QA viruses could replicate in intranasally infected
mice, but were not lethal to them, showing low pathogenicity in mammals. However,
they killed all intravenously inoculated chickens, showing high pathogenicity in 
poultry. Results from amantadine sensitivity tests of wild-type QA viruses and
their reverse genetic viruses demonstrated that all QA viruses were resistant to 
amantadine, and the M2 Ser31Asn mutation was determined as the most likely cause 
of the increased amantadine-resistance of H5N1 QA viruses. Our study confirmed
experimentally that the amino acid at residue 31 in the M2 protein plays a major 
role in determining the amantadine-resistance phenotype of H5N1 influenza
viruses. Our findings provide further evidence that quails may play important
roles in the evolution of influenza A viruses, which raises concerns over
possible transmissions of H5N1 viruses among poultry, wild birds, and humans.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-014-1084-6 
PMID: 24993865  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15235128

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Jul 13;101(28):10452-7. Epub 2004 Jul 2.

The evolution of H5N1 influenza viruses in ducks in southern China.

Chen H(1), Deng G, Li Z, Tian G, Li Y, Jiao P, Zhang L, Liu Z, Webster RG, Yu K.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Influenza Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture, Harbin Veterinary 
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 427 Maduan Street, 
Harbin 150001, People's Republic of China. hlchen1@yahoo.com

The pathogenicity of avian H5N1 influenza viruses to mammals has been evolving
since the mid-1980s. Here, we demonstrate that H5N1 influenza viruses, isolated
from apparently healthy domestic ducks in mainland China from 1999 through 2002, 
were becoming progressively more pathogenic for mammals, and we present a
hypothesis explaining the mechanism of this evolutionary direction. Twenty-one
viruses isolated from apparently healthy ducks in southern China from 1999
through 2002 were confirmed to be H5N1 subtype influenza A viruses. These
isolates are antigenically similar to A/Goose/Guangdong/1/96 (H5N1) virus, which 
was the source of the 1997 Hong Kong "bird flu" hemagglutinin gene, and all are
highly pathogenic in chickens. The viruses form four pathotypes on the basis of
their replication and lethality in mice. There is a clear temporal pattern in the
progressively increasing pathogenicity of these isolates in the mammalian model. 
Five of six H5N1 isolates tested replicated in inoculated ducks and were shed
from trachea or cloaca, but none caused disease signs or death. Phylogenetic
analysis of the full genome indicated that most of the viruses are reassortants
containing the A/Goose/Guangdong/1/96-like hemagglutinin gene and the other genes
from unknown Eurasian avian influenza viruses. This study is a characterization
of the H5N1 avian influenza viruses recently circulating in ducks in mainland
China. Our findings suggest that immediate action is needed to prevent the
transmission of highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses from the apparently
healthy ducks into chickens or mammalian hosts.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0403212101 
PMCID: PMC478602
PMID: 15235128  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19720095

1. Virus Res. 2009 Dec;146(1-2):19-28. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2009.08.010. Epub
2009 Aug 29.

Characterization of highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza viruses isolated from 
poultry markets in central China.

Chen J(1), Fang F, Yang Z, Liu X, Zhang H, Zhang Z, Zhang X, Chen Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Hubei, China.

H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) viruses have seriously affected the
Asian poultry industry since their recurrence in 2003. While surveillance in
southern China has revealed that H5N1 viruses underwent extensive genetic
reassortment to generate many different viral genotype viruses, little is known
concerning the genotypes of H5N1 virus that circulated in central China in recent
years. In this study, 16 H5N1 influenza viruses were isolated from the poultry
market in central China during late 2006 and early 2007, and the genotypes and
pathogenicity of the viruses were identified and characterized. All eight
segments of each virus were sequenced, and phylogenetic analysis showed that the 
two surface glycoprotein genes, hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA), of all
the viruses were closely related to the H5N1 viruses isolated in poultry in
southern China since 2006. Phylogenetic analysis of the internal protein genes
indicated that four viral genotypes circulated in poultry markets in central
China. The virulence of 7 of the 16 isolates was tested in chickens and mice. The
results showed that the 7 isolates were highly pathogenic for SPF chickens, and
had a varied virulence in mice. Our results indicate that the H5N1 viruses
circulated in central China have diversified characteristics of genotype and
virulence.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2009.08.010 
PMID: 19720095  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25962145

1. PLoS One. 2015 May 11;10(5):e0120061. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120061.
eCollection 2015.

Pathogenicity of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza Virus H5N1 in Naturally
Infected Poultry in Egypt.

Hagag IT(1), Mansour SM(2), Zhang Z(3), Ali AA(2), Ismaiel el-BM(2), Salama
AA(2), Cardona CJ(4), Collins J(5), Xing Z(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Zagazig University,
Zagazig, Egypt; Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, College of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, Saint Paul, Minnesota,
United States of America.
(2)Department of Virology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Zagazig University,
Zagazig, Egypt.
(3)The State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology and Medical School,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China.
(4)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, Saint Paul, Minnesota, United
States of America.
(5)Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory, College of Veterinary Medicine, University
of Minnesota, Twin Cities, Saint Paul, Minnesota, United States of America.
(6)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, Saint Paul, Minnesota, United
States of America; The State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology and
Medical School, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza virus (HPAIV) H5N1 has been endemic in Egypt
since 2006, and there is increasing concern for its potential to become highly
transmissible among humans. Infection by HPAIV H5N1 has been described in
experimentally challenged birds. However, the pathogenicity of the H5N1 isolated 
in Egypt has never been reported in naturally infected chickens and ducks. Here
we report a 2013 outbreak of HPAIV H5N1 in commercial poultry farms and backyards
in Sharkia Province, Egypt. The main symptoms were ecchymosis on the shanks and
feet, cyanosis of the comb and wattles, subcutaneous edema of the head and neck
for chickens, and nervous signs (torticollis) for ducks. Within 48-72 hrs of the 
onset of illness, the average mortality rates were 22.8-30% and 28.5-40% in
vaccinated chickens and non-vaccinated ducks, respectively. Tissue samples of
chickens and ducks were collected for analyses with cross-section
immunohistochemistry and real-time RT-PCR for specific viral RNA transcripts.
While viral RNA was detected in nearly all tissues and sera collected, viral
nucleoprotein was detected almost ubiquitously in all tissues, including testis. 
Interestingly, viral antigen was also observed in endothelial cells of most
organs in chickens, and clearly detected in the trachea and brain in particular. 
Viral nucleoprotein was also detected in mononuclear cells of various organs,
especially pulmonary tissue. We performed phylogenetic analyses and compared the 
genomic sequences of the hemagglutinin (HA) and nonstructural proteins (NS) among
the isolated viruses, the HPAIV circulated in Egypt in the past and currently,
and some available vaccine strains. Further analysis of deduced amino acids of
both HA and NS1 revealed that our isolates carried molecular determinants of
HPAIV, including the multibasic amino acids (PQGERRRK/KR*GLF) in the cleavage
site in HA and glutamate at position 92 (D92E) in NS1. This is the first report
of the pathogenicity of the HPAIVH5N1 strain currently circulating in naturally
infected poultry in Egypt, which may provide unique insights into the viral
pathogenesis in HPAIV-infected chickens and ducks.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120061 
PMCID: PMC4427178
PMID: 25962145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27873070

1. Arch Virol. 2017 Mar;162(3):841-847. doi: 10.1007/s00705-016-3149-4. Epub 2016
Nov 21.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza (H5N1) in Nigeria in 2015: evidence of
widespread circulation of WA2 clade 2.3.2.1c.

Shittu I(1), Meseko CA(2), Gado DA(2), Olawuyi AK(2), Chinyere CN(2), Anefu E(2),
Solomon P(2), Okewole PA(3), Shamaki D(2), Joannis TM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Virology Division, National Veterinary Research Institute, PMB 01, Vom,
930010, Plateau State, Nigeria. ismaila.shittu@gmail.com.
(2)Virology Division, National Veterinary Research Institute, PMB 01, Vom,
930010, Plateau State, Nigeria.
(3)Central Diagnostic Division, National Veterinary Research Institute, Vom,
Plateau State, Nigeria.
(4)Virology Division, National Veterinary Research Institute, PMB 01, Vom,
930010, Plateau State, Nigeria. tmjoannis@gmail.com.

Genetic analysis of the complete haemagglutinin (HA) gene of fourteen Nigerian
avian influenza isolates showed multiple basic amino acids at the cleavage site
(321PQRERRRK del R*GLF333), characteristic of highly pathogenic avian influenza
(HPAI). Substitution of Gln to Lys at position 322 (H5-specific numbering) was
identified in one isolate. In some isolates, amino acid substitutions were
observed across the HA gene, however the receptor binding, antigenic and
glycosylation sites were conserved in all. Phylogenetic analysis revealed two
clusters of the HPAI H5N1 clade 2.3.2.1c. Cluster I has close genetic relatedness
(97.8-99.8%) with viruses circulating in some West Africa countries. Cluster II
shared close identity (98.9-100.0%) with isolates from Europe, Côte d'Ivoire and 
Niger and viruses from this cluster were detected in five of the eleven states
investigated in Nigeria. In view of the continuous HPAI outbreaks being recorded 
in Nigerian poultry and the zoonotic potential of the virus, extensive and
continued characterization of HPAI isolates is advocated.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-016-3149-4 
PMID: 27873070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19137421

1. Virus Genes. 2009 Apr;38(2):263-8. doi: 10.1007/s11262-008-0319-9. Epub 2009 Jan 
10.

Genetic characterization of an H5N1 avian influenza virus with neurovirulence in 
ducks.

Zou W(1), Yu Z, Zhou H, Tu J, Jin M.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Animal Infectious Disease, State Key Laboratory of Agriculture
Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, People's Republic 
of China.

In this report, an H5N1 avian influenza virus, A/duck/Hubei/hangmei01/2006, which
could lead to acute disease including neurovirulence and mortality in ducks, was 
isolated in brains of domestic ducks in spring of 2006. Molecular
characterization of the genes revealed that this virus harbored the common
characteristics of a highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI). Phylogenetic
analyses demonstrated that this virus was a member of the Fujian-like virus
sublineage. All eight genes except NA and PB2 had the closest genetic relatives
to the human influenza virus A/China/GD01/2006. It might indicate that the virus 
A/duck/Hubei/hangmei01/2006 originated from southern China, resulting from the
wild bird migration or poultry transportation, and indicate that more
surveillance upon evolution and transmission of influenza viruses in ducks was
urgent.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-008-0319-9 
PMID: 19137421  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23381391

1. Arch Virol. 2013 Jun;158(6):1361-5. doi: 10.1007/s00705-012-1599-x. Epub 2013 Feb
5.

Detection of A/H5N1 virus from asymptomatic native ducks in mid-summer in Egypt.

Hassan MK(1), Jobre Y, Arafa A, Abdelwhab EM, Kilany WH, Khoulosy SG, Bakry NR,
Baile E, Ali A, Ankers P, Lubroth J.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory for Veterinary Quality Control on Poultry Production, P.O.
Box 246, Dokki, Giza 12618, Egypt. mkahassan@hotmail.com

In spite of all the efforts to control H5N1 in Egypt, the virus still circulates 
endemically, causing significant economic losses in the poultry industry and
endangering human health. This study aimed to elucidate the role of clinically
healthy ducks in perpetuation of H5N1 virus in Egypt in mid-summer, when the
disease prevalence is at its lowest level. A total of 927 cloacal swabs collected
from 111 household and 71 commercial asymptomatic duck flocks were screened by
using a real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. Only five
scavenging ducks from a native breed in three flocks were found infected with
H5N1 virus. This study indicates that H5N1 virus can persist in free-range ducks 
in hot weather, in contrast to their counterparts confined in household or
commercial settings. Surveillance to identify other potential reservoirs is
essential.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-012-1599-x 
PMID: 23381391  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20298489

1. Zoonoses Public Health. 2010 Dec;57(7-8):e184-94. doi:
10.1111/j.1863-2378.2010.01326.x.

Avian influenza A virus monitoring in wild birds in Bavaria: occurrence and
heterogeneity of H5 and N1 encoding genes.

Lang V(1), Rinder M, Hafner-Marx A, Rabl S, Bogner KH, Neubauer-Juric A, Büttner 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Bavarian Health and Food Safety Authority, Oberschleissheim, Germany.

To define avian influenza virus prevalence in wild birds in Bavaria, 12,930
tracheal, cloacal swabs or tissue samples from various waterfowl species were
screened between January 2006 and December 2007. In 291 (2.3%) birds, genomes of 
influenza A viruses were detected by reverse transcription real-time PCR
(rRT-PCR) targeting the matrix protein genes. Furthermore, solitary H5
hemagglutinin or N1 neuraminidase encoding genes were identified in 35 (0.3%)
apparently healthy birds; whereas highly pathogenic (HPAI) H5N1 virus genomes
were only diagnosed in dead wild birds (n = 93; 0.7%) found across this federal
state region. In this study, multiple import events for H5N1 viruses were
confirmed during 2006 and 2007. In addition, our findings argue against an
existing HPAI H5N1 reservoir in aquatic birds in Bavaria. By contrast,
phylogenetic analyses of the H5 or N1 sequences of low pathogenic avian influenza
(LPAI) viruses revealed a marked diversity and multiple genetic lineages. This
diversity of LPAI H5 and N1 subtype components indicates the existence of LPAI HA
and NA gene pools which differ from the Bavarian HPAI H5N1. Moreover, the
hemagglutinin amino acid differences between LPAI H5 viruses of a western
European genotypic lineage observed in wild birds suggest a continuous evolution 
of LPAI viruses in Bavaria.

© 2010 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1863-2378.2010.01326.x 
PMID: 20298489  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26900963

1. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 22;11(2):e0149608. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149608.
eCollection 2016.

Intersubtype Reassortments of H5N1 Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza Viruses
Isolated from Quail.

Nguyen TH(1)(2), Than VT(1), Thanh HD(1)(2), Hung VK(2), Nguyen DT(2), Kim W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Chung-Ang University College of Medicine, Seoul,
South Korea.
(2)Central Vietnam Veterinary Institute, Nha Trang, Vietnam.

H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) viruses are considered a threat to 
national animal industries, causing production losses and high mortality in
domestic poultry. In recent years, quail has become a popular terrestrial poultry
species raised for production of meat and eggs in Asia. In this study, to better 
understand the roles of quail in H5N1 viral evolution, two H5N1-positive samples,
designated A/quail/Vietnam/CVVI-49/2010 (CVVI-49/2010) and
A/quail/Vietnam/CVVI-50/2014 (CVVI-50/2014), were isolated from quail during H5N1
outbreaks in Vietnam, and their whole genome were analyzed. The phylogenetic
analysis reveals new evolutionary variation in the worldwide H5N1 viruses. The
quail HA genes were clustered into clades 1.1.1 (CVVI-49/2010) and clade 2.3.2.1c
(CVVI-50/2014), which may have evolved from viruses circulating from chickens
and/or ducks in Cambodia, mainland of China, Taiwan, Indonesia, and South Korea
in recent years. Interestingly, the M2 gene of the CVVI-49/2010 strain contained 
amino acid substitutions at position 26L-I and 31S-N that are related to
amantadine-resistance. In particular, the CVVI-50/2014 strain revealed evidence
of multiple intersubtype reassortment events between virus clades 2.3.2.1c,
2.3.2.1b, and 2.3.2.1a. Data from this study supports the possible role of quail 
as an important intermediate host in avian influenza virus evolution. Therefore, 
additional surveillance is needed to monitor these HPAI viruses both
serologically and virologically in quail.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149608 
PMCID: PMC4765837
PMID: 26900963  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17251574

1. J Gen Virol. 2007 Feb;88(Pt 2):554-8.

Molecular analysis of highly pathogenic avian influenza virus of subtype H5N1
isolated from wild birds and mammals in northern Germany.

Weber S(1), Harder T, Starick E, Beer M, Werner O, Hoffmann B, Mettenleiter TC,
Mundt E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, 17493
Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany.

Analysis of the full-length sequences of all eight segments of the German
wild-bird H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza virus index isolate, A/Cygnus
cygnus/Germany/R65/2006, and an H5N1 isolate from a cat (A/cat/Germany/R606/2006)
obtained during an outbreak in February 2006 revealed a very high similarity
between these two sequences. One amino acid substitution in the PA gene, encoding
a protein involved in virus RNA replication, and one amino acid substitution in
the haemagglutinin (HA) protein were observed. Phylogenetic analyses of the HA
and neuraminidase nucleotide sequences showed that avian influenza H5N1 isolates 
from the Astrakhan region located in southern Russia were the closest relatives. 
Reassortment events could be excluded in comparison with other 'Qinghai-like'
H5N1 viruses. In addition, an H5N1 isolate originating from a single outbreak in 
poultry in Germany was found to be related closely to the H5N1 viruses
circulating at that time in the wild-bird population.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.82300-0 
PMID: 17251574  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22669540

1. Virus Genes. 2012 Aug;45(1):14-23. doi: 10.1007/s11262-012-0758-1. Epub 2012 Jun 
5.

Diversifying evolution of highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza virus in Egypt
from 2006 to 2011.

Abdelwhab EM(1), Arafa AS, Stech J, Grund C, Stech O, Graeber-Gerberding M, Beer 
M, Hassan MK, Aly MM, Harder TC, Hafez HM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Poultry Diseases, Free University of Berlin, Koenigsweg 63, 14163
Berlin, Germany.

An evolutionary analysis was conducted of 354 hemagglutinin (HA) and 208
neuraminidase (NA) genes, including newly generated sequences of 5 HA and 30 NA, 
of Egyptian H5N1 clade 2.2.1 viruses isolated from poultry and humans. Five
distinct phylogenetically distinguishable clusters arose from a monophyletic
origin since 2006. Only two clusters remained in circulation after 2009: (i) A
cluster of viruses arose in 2007 in industrial-vaccinated chickens and carried
multiple mutations in or adjacent to the immunogenic epitopes of the HA. Viruses 
within this cluster evolved with significantly elevated mutation rates indicating
persisting selective pressures, e.g. to escape host immunity and (ii) The second 
group arose in 2008 and harboured strains from recent human infections featuring 
a conspicuous deletion in the HA receptor-binding domain and substitutions close 
to the highly conserved active site of the NA. In both sublineages, a number of
positively selected amino acids, different glycosylation patterns and variations 
in the polybasic proteolytic cleavage site were observed. Continuous monitoring
of the evolving H5N1 virus in Egypt is essential to develop new control campaigns
in poultry and human population.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-012-0758-1 
PMID: 22669540  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30075357

1. Virology. 2018 Oct;523:22-26. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2018.07.028. Epub 2018 Jul 31.

Influenza A(H5N1) viruses with A(H9N2) single gene (matrix or PB1) reassortment
isolated from Cambodian live bird markets.

Suttie A(1), Karlsson EA(2), Deng YM(3), Horm SV(2), Yann S(2), Tok S(2), Sorn
S(4), Holl D(4), Tum S(5), Hurt AC(3), Greenhill AR(6), Barr IG(3), Horwood
PF(7), Dussart P(8).

Author information: 
(1)Virology Unit, Institut Pasteur du Cambodge, Institut Pasteur International
Network, Phnom Penh, Cambodia; School of Applied and Biomedical Sciences,
Federation University, Churchill, Australia; WHO Collaborating Centre for
Reference and Research on Influenza, Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference
Laboratory, at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne,
Victoria 3000, Australia.
(2)Virology Unit, Institut Pasteur du Cambodge, Institut Pasteur International
Network, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(3)WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza, Victorian
Infectious Diseases Reference Laboratory, at the Peter Doherty Institute for
Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Victoria 3000, Australia.
(4)General Directorate for Animal Health and Production, Cambodian Ministry of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(5)National Animal Health and Production Research Institute, Cambodian Ministry
of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(6)School of Applied and Biomedical Sciences, Federation University, Churchill,
Australia.
(7)Virology Unit, Institut Pasteur du Cambodge, Institut Pasteur International
Network, Phnom Penh, Cambodia; Australian Institute of Tropical Health and
Medicine, James Cook University, Cairns, Queensland, 4870, Australia. Electronic 
address: paul.horwood@jcu.edu.au.
(8)Virology Unit, Institut Pasteur du Cambodge, Institut Pasteur International
Network, Phnom Penh, Cambodia. Electronic address: pdussart@pasteur-kh.org.

Live bird market surveillance for avian influenza viruses in Cambodia in 2015 has
led to the detection of two 7:1 reassortant influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.2.1c
viruses. These reassortant strains, designated A/duck/Cambodia/Z564W35M1/2015 and
A/chicken/Cambodia/Z850W49M1/2015, both contained a single gene (PB1 and matrix
gene, respectively) from concurrently circulating A(H9N2) influenza viruses. All 
other viral genes from both isolates clustered with A(H5N1) clade 2.3.2.1
viruses. Continued and prolonged co-circulation of influenza A(H5N1) and A(H9N2) 
viruses in Cambodian live bird markets may present a risk for the emergence of
novel influenza reassortant viruses with negative agricultural and/or public
health implications.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2018.07.028 
PMID: 30075357  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27000533

1. Virol J. 2016 Mar 22;13:49. doi: 10.1186/s12985-016-0477-7.

Phylodynamics of avian influenza clade 2.2.1 H5N1 viruses in Egypt.

Arafa A(1)(2), El-Masry I(3), Kholosy S(4), Hassan MK(4), Dauphin G(5), Lubroth
J(5), Makonnen YJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) - Emergency
Center of Transboundary Animal Diseases (ECTAD), 11 Al Eslah El Zerai St, P.O.
Box, 2223, Giza, Egypt. araby85@hotmail.com.
(2)National Laboratory for Veterinary Quality Control on Poultry Production
(NLQP), Animal Health Research Institute, P.O. Box, 264, Giza, Egypt.
araby85@hotmail.com.
(3)Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) - Emergency
Center of Transboundary Animal Diseases (ECTAD), 11 Al Eslah El Zerai St, P.O.
Box, 2223, Giza, Egypt.
(4)National Laboratory for Veterinary Quality Control on Poultry Production
(NLQP), Animal Health Research Institute, P.O. Box, 264, Giza, Egypt.
(5)Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Viale delle
Terme di Caracalla, 00153, Rome, Italy.
(6)Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) - Emergency
Center of Transboundary Animal Diseases (ECTAD), 11 Al Eslah El Zerai St, P.O.
Box, 2223, Giza, Egypt. Yilma.Makonnen@fao.org.

BACKGROUND: Highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) viruses of the H5N1 subtype 
are widely distributed within poultry populations in Egypt and have caused
multiple human infections. Linking the epidemiological and sequence data is
important to understand the transmission, persistence and evolution of the virus.
This work describes the phylogenetic dynamics of H5N1 based on molecular
characterization of the hemagglutinin (HA) gene of isolates collected from
February 2006 to May 2014.
METHODS: Full-length HA sequences of 368 H5N1 viruses were generated and were
genetically analysed to study their genetic evolution. They were collected from
different poultry species, production sectors, and geographic locations in Egypt.
The Bayesian Markov Chain Monte Carlo (BMCMC) method was applied to estimate the 
evolutionary rates among different virus clusters; additionally, an analysis of
selection pressures in the HA gene was performed using the Single Likelihood
Ancestor Counting (SLAC) method.
RESULTS: The phylogenetic analysis of the H5 gene from 2006-14 indicated the
presence of one virus introduction of the classic clade (2.2.1) from which two
main subgroups were originated, the variant subgroup which was further subdivided
into 2 sub-divisions (2.2.1.1 and 2.2.1.1a) and the endemic subgroup (2.2.1.2).
The clade 2.2.1.2 showed a high evolution rate over a period of 6 years (6.9 ×
10(-3) sub/site/year) in comparison to the 2.2.1.1a variant cluster (7.2 × 10(-3)
over a period of 4 years). Those two clusters are under positive selection as
they possess 5 distinct positively selected sites in the HA gene. The mutations
at 120, 154, and 162 HA antigenic sites and the other two mutations (129∆, I151T)
that occurred from 2009-14 were found to be stable in the 2.2.1.2 clade.
Additionally, 13 groups of H5N1 HPAI viruses were identified based on their amino
acid sequences at the cleavage site and "EKRRKKR" became the dominant pattern
beginning in 2013.
CONCLUSIONS: Continuous evolution of H5N1 HPAI viruses in Egypt has been observed
in all poultry farming and production systems in almost all regions of the
country. The wide circulation of the 2.2.1.2 clade carrying triple mutations
(120, 129∆, I151T) associated with increased binding affinity to human receptors 
is an alarming finding of public health importance.

DOI: 10.1186/s12985-016-0477-7 
PMCID: PMC4802640
PMID: 27000533  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18941631

1. PLoS One. 2008;3(10):e3462. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003462. Epub 2008 Oct 21.

Evolution of highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza viruses in Vietnam between
2001 and 2007.

Wan XF(1), Nguyen T, Davis CT, Smith CB, Zhao ZM, Carrel M, Inui K, Do HT, Mai
DT, Jadhao S, Balish A, Shu B, Luo F, Emch M, Matsuoka Y, Lindstrom SE, Cox NJ,
Nguyen CV, Klimov A, Donis RO.

Author information: 
(1)Influenza Division, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta,
Georgia, United States of America.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 viruses have caused dramatic
economic losses to the poultry industry of Vietnam and continue to pose a serious
threat to public health. As of June 2008, Vietnam had reported nearly one third
of worldwide laboratory confirmed human H5N1 infections. To better understand the
emergence, spread and evolution of H5N1 in Vietnam we studied over 300 H5N1 avian
influenza viruses isolated from Vietnam since their first detection in 2001. Our 
phylogenetic analyses indicated that six genetically distinct H5N1 viruses were
introduced into Vietnam during the past seven years. The H5N1 lineage that
evolved following the introduction in 2003 of the A/duck/Hong Kong/821/2002-like 
viruses, with clade 1 hemagglutinin (HA), continued to predominate in southern
Vietnam as of May 2007. A virus with a clade 2.3.4 HA newly introduced into
northern Vietnam in 2007, reassorted with pre-existing clade 1 viruses, resulting
in the emergence of novel genotypes with neuraminidase (NA) and/or internal gene 
segments from clade 1 viruses. A total of nine distinct genotypes have been
present in Vietnam since 2001, including five that were circulating in 2007. At
least four of these genotypes appear to have originated in Vietnam and represent 
novel H5N1 viruses not reported elsewhere. Geographic and temporal analyses of
H5N1 infection dynamics in poultry suggest that the majority of viruses
containing new genes were first detected in northern Vietnam and subsequently
spread to southern Vietnam after reassorting with pre-existing local viruses in
northern Vietnam. Although the routes of entry and spread of H5N1 in Vietnam
remain speculative, enhanced poultry import controls and virologic surveillance
efforts may help curb the entry and spread of new HPAI viral genes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003462 
PMCID: PMC2565130
PMID: 18941631  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27309046

1. Avian Dis. 2016 May;60(1 Suppl):108-17. doi: 10.1637/11136-050815-Reg.

The Continuing Evolution of H5N1 and H9N2 Influenza Viruses in Bangladesh Between
2013 and 2014.

Marinova-Petkova A(1), Shanmuganatham K, Feeroz MM(2), Jones-Engel L(3), Hasan
MK(2), Akhtar S(2), Turner J(1), Walker D(1), Seiler P(1), Franks J(1), McKenzie 
P(1), Krauss S(1), Webby RJ(1), Webster RG(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)A Department of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38105.
(2)B Department of Zoology, Jahangirnagar University, Savar, Dhaka, Bangladesh
1342.
(3)C National Primate Research Center, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98195.
(4)D Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia 21589.

In 2011, avian influenza surveillance at the Bangladesh live bird markets (LBMs) 
showed complete replacement of the highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 
virus of clade 2.2.2 (Qinghai-like H5N1 lineage) by the HPAI H5N1 clade 2.3.2.1. 
This clade, which continues to circulate in Bangladesh and neighboring countries,
is an intra-and interclade reassortant; its HA, polymerase basic 1 (PB1),
polymerase (PA), and nonstructural (NS) genes come from subclade 2.3.2.1a; the
polymerase basic 2 (PB2) comes from subclade 2.3.2.1c; and the NA, nucleocapsid
protein (NP), and matrix (M) gene from clade 2.3.4.2. The H9N2 influenza viruses 
cocirculating in the Bangladesh LBMs are also reassortants, possessing five genes
(NS, M, NP, PA, and PB1) from an HPAI H7N3 virus previously isolated in Pakistan.
Despite frequent coinfection of chickens and ducks, reassortment between these
H5N1 and H9N2 viruses has been rare. However, all such reassortants detected in
2011 through 2013 have carried seven genes from the local HPAI H5N1 lineage and
the PB1 gene from the Bangladeshi H9N2 clade G1 Mideast, itself derived from HPAI
H7N3 virus. Although the live birds we sampled in Bangladesh showed no clinical
signs of morbidity, the emergence of this reassortant HPAI H5N1 lineage further
complicates endemic circulation of H5N1 viruses in Bangladesh, posing a threat to
both poultry and humans.

DOI: 10.1637/11136-050815-Reg 
PMCID: PMC5479493
PMID: 27309046  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26656683

1. J Virol. 2015 Dec 9;90(4):1872-9. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02387-15. Print 2016 Feb 15.

Glycine at Position 622 in PB1 Contributes to the Virulence of H5N1 Avian
Influenza Virus in Mice.

Feng X(1), Wang Z(1), Shi J(1), Deng G(1), Kong H(1), Tao S(1), Li C(1), Liu
L(1), Guan Y(1), Chen H(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, People's Republic of
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, People's Republic of
China chenhualan@caas.cn.

We isolated two H5N1 viruses, A/duck/Hunan/S4020/2008 (DK/08) and
A/chicken/Guangxi/S2039/2009 (CK/09), from live-bird markets during routine
surveillance and found that these two viruses are genetically similar but differ 
in their replication and virulence in mice. The CK/09 virus is lethal for mice
with a 50% mouse lethal dose (MLD50) of 1.6 log10 50% egg infectious doses
(EID50), whereas the DK/08 virus is nonpathogenic for mice with an MLD50 value of
6.2 log10 EID50. We explored the genetic basis of the virulence difference of
these two viruses by generating a series of reassortant viruses and mutants in
the lethal virus CK/09 background and evaluating their virulence in mice. We
found that the PB1 gene of the DK/08 virus dramatically attenuated the virulence 
of the CK/09 virus and that the amino acid at position 622 in PB1 made an
important contribution. We further demonstrated that the mutation of glycine (G) 
to aspartic acid (D) at position 622 in PB1 partially impaired the binding of PB1
to viral RNA, thereby dramatically decreasing the polymerase activity and
attenuating H5N1 virus virulence in mice. Our results identify a novel
virulence-related marker of H5N1 influenza viruses and provide a new target for
live attenuated vaccine development.IMPORTANCE: H5N1 avian influenza viruses have
caused the deaths of nearly 60% of the humans that they have infected since 1997 
and clearly represent a threat to public health. A thorough understanding of the 
genetic basis of virulence determinants will provide important insights for
antiviral drug and live attenuated vaccine development. Several virulence-related
markers in the PB2, PA, M1, and NS1 proteins of H5N1 viruses have been
identified. In this study, we isolated two H5N1 avian influenza viruses that are 
genetically similar but differ in their virulence in mice, and we identified a
new virulence-related marker in the PB1 gene. We found that the mutation of
glycine (G) to aspartic acid (D) at position 622 in PB1 partially impairs the
binding of PB1 to viral RNA, thereby attenuating H5N1 virus virulence in mice.
This newly identified virulence-related marker could be applied to the
development of live attenuated vaccines against H5N1 influenza.

Copyright © 2016 Feng et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02387-15 
PMCID: PMC4733975
PMID: 26656683  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17522271

1. J Clin Microbiol. 2007 Jul;45(7):2284-6. Epub 2007 May 23.

Erythrocyte binding preference of avian influenza H5N1 viruses.

Louisirirotchanakul S(1), Lerdsamran H, Wiriyarat W, Sangsiriwut K, Chaichoune K,
Pooruk P, Songserm T, Kitphati R, Sawanpanyalert P, Komoltri C, Auewarakul P,
Puthavathana P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol
University, Bangkok 10700, Thailand.

Five erythrocyte species (horse, goose, chicken, guinea pig, and human) were used
to agglutinate avian influenza H5N1 viruses by hemagglutination assay and to
detect specific antibody by hemagglutination inhibition test. We found that goose
erythrocytes confer a greater advantage over other erythrocyte species in both
assays.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00921-07 
PMCID: PMC1933005
PMID: 17522271  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22017055

1. Avian Dis. 2011 Sep;55(3):499-502.

Isolation and identification of highly pathogenic avian influenza virus subtype
H5N1 from emus from the Ein Gedi oasis by the Dead Sea.

Amnon I(1), Shkoda I, Lapin E, Raibstein I, Rosenbluth E, Nagar S, Perk S,
Bellaiche M, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Israel Veterinary Services, Southern Poultry Diagnostic Laboratory, Beer
Tuvia, Israel.

An avian influenza virus (AIV), A/Emu/Israel/552/2010/(H5N1), was isolated from a
dead emu that was found in the Ein Gedi oasis near the Dead Sea. The virus
molecular characterization was performed by reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) and real-time RT-PCR using AIV subtype-specific primers. 
The virus was of high pathogenicity, according to its intravenous pathogenicity
index of 2.85 and the nucleotide sequencing at the cleavage site of the
hemagglutinin gene, GERRRKKR, which is typical for highly pathogenic chicken
influenza A viruses.

DOI: 10.1637/9607-120510-Case.1 
PMID: 22017055  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20538856

1. J Virol. 2010 Sep;84(17):8389-97. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00413-10. Epub 2010 Jun 10.

Continued evolution of H5N1 influenza viruses in wild birds, domestic poultry,
and humans in China from 2004 to 2009.

Li Y(1), Shi J, Zhong G, Deng G, Tian G, Ge J, Zeng X, Song J, Zhao D, Liu L,
Jiang Y, Guan Y, Bu Z, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Influenza Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture and National Key
Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute,
CAAS, 427 Maduan Street, Harbin 150001, People's Republic of China.

Despite substantial efforts to control H5N1 avian influenza viruses (AIVs), the
viruses have continued to evolve and cause disease outbreaks in poultry and
infections in humans. In this report, we analyzed 51 representative H5N1 AIVs
isolated from domestic poultry, wild birds, and humans in China during 2004 to
2009, and 21 genotypes were detected based on whole-genome sequences. Twelve
genotypes of AIVs in southern China bear similar H5 hemagglutinin (HA) genes
(clade 2.3). These AIVs did not display antigenic drift and could be completely
protected against by the A/goose/Guangdong/1/96 (GS/GD/1/96)-based oil-adjuvanted
killed vaccine and recombinant Newcastle disease virus vaccine, which have been
used in China. In addition, antigenically drifted H5N1 viruses, represented by
A/chicken/Shanxi/2/06 (CK/SX/2/06), were detected in chickens from several
provinces in northern China. The CK/SX/2/06-like viruses are reassortants with
newly emerged HA, NA, and PB1 genes that could not be protected against by the
GS/GD/1/96-based vaccines. These viruses also reacted poorly with antisera
generated from clade 2.2 and 2.3 viruses. The majority of the viruses isolated
from southern China were lethal in mice and ducks, while the CK/SX/2/06-like
viruses caused mild disease in mice and could not replicate in ducks. Our results
demonstrate that the H5N1 AIVs circulating in nature have complex biological
characteristics and pose a continued challenge for disease control and pandemic
preparedness.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00413-10 
PMCID: PMC2919039
PMID: 20538856  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20071565

1. J Virol. 2010 Apr;84(7):3239-47. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02385-09. Epub 2010 Jan 13.

Evolutionary dynamics of multiple sublineages of H5N1 influenza viruses in
Nigeria from 2006 to 2008.

Fusaro A(1), Nelson MI, Joannis T, Bertolotti L, Monne I, Salviato A, Olaleye O, 
Shittu I, Sulaiman L, Lombin LH, Capua I, Holmes EC, Cattoli G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale delle Venezie, Research & Development
Department, OIE/FAO, and National Reference Laboratory for Newcastle Disease and 
Avian Influenza, OIE Collaborating Centre for Epidemiology, Training and Control 
of Emerging Avian Diseases, Viale dell'Università 10, 35020, Legnaro, Padua,
Italy. afusaro@izsvenezie.it

Highly pathogenic A/H5N1 avian influenza (HPAI H5N1) viruses have seriously
affected the Nigerian poultry industry since early 2006. Previous studies have
identified multiple introductions of the virus into Nigeria and several
reassortment events between cocirculating lineages. To determine the spatial,
evolutionary, and population dynamics of the multiple H5N1 lineages cocirculating
in Nigeria, we conducted a phylogenetic analysis of whole-genome sequences from
106 HPAI H5N1 viruses isolated between 2006 and 2008 and representing all 25
Nigerian states and the Federal Capital Territory (FCT) reporting outbreaks. We
identified a major new subclade in Nigeria that is phylogenetically
distinguishable from all previously identified sublineages, as well as two novel 
reassortment events. A detailed analysis of viral phylogeography identified two
major source populations for the HPAI H5N1 virus in Nigeria, one in a major
commercial poultry area (southwest region) and one in northern Nigeria, where
contact between wild birds and backyard poultry is frequent. These findings
suggested that migratory birds from Eastern Europe or Russia may serve an
important role in the introduction of HPAI H5N1 viruses into Nigeria, although
virus spread through the movement of poultry and poultry products cannot be
excluded. Our study provides new insight into the genesis and evolution of H5N1
influenza viruses in Nigeria and has important implications for targeting
surveillance efforts to rapidly identify the spread of the virus into and within 
Nigeria.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02385-09 
PMCID: PMC2838112
PMID: 20071565  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17459857

1. J Vet Diagn Invest. 2007 May;19(3):279-82.

Genetic evidence for multi-event imports of avian influenza virus A (H5N1) into
Bavaria, Germany.

Rinder M(1), Lang V, Fuchs C, Hafner-Marx A, Bogner KH, Neubauer A, Büttner M,
Rinder H.

Author information: 
(1)Bavarian Health and Food Safety Authority, Veterinaerstr. 2, 85764
Oberschleissheim, Germany.

The almost simultaneous initial detections of avian influenza A H5N1 viruses in
central Europe in February 2006, at a time devoid of migratory bird activity,
raised the question of the origin of these viruses. This report presents
molecular data from Europe providing evidence for multiple and spatially
overlapping H5N1 introductions into Bavaria, Germany.

DOI: 10.1177/104063870701900308 
PMID: 17459857  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17498292

1. Virol J. 2007 May 11;4:43.

First introduction of highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza A viruses in wild
and domestic birds in Denmark, Northern Europe.

Bragstad K(1), Jørgensen PH, Handberg K, Hammer AS, Kabell S, Fomsgaard A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Virus Research and Development, Statens Serum Institut,
Copenhagen S, Denmark. KBR@ssi.dk

BACKGROUND: Since 2005 highly pathogenic (HP) avian influenza A H5N1 viruses have
spread from Asia to Africa and Europe infecting poultry, humans and wild birds.
HP H5N1 virus was isolated in Denmark for the first time in March 2006. A total
of 44 wild birds were found positive for the HP H5N1 infection. In addition, one 
case was reported in a backyard poultry flock.
RESULTS: Full-genome characterisation of nine isolates revealed that the Danish
H5N1 viruses were highly similar to German H5N1 isolates in all genes from the
same time period. The haemagglutinin gene grouped phylogenetically in H5 clade 2 
subclade 2 and closest relatives besides the German isolates were isolates from
Croatia in 2005, Nigeria and Niger in 2006 and isolates from Astrakhan in Russia 
2006. The German and Danish isolates shared unique substitutions in the NA, PB1
and NS2 proteins.
CONCLUSION: The first case of HP H5N1 infection of wild and domestic birds in
Denmark was experienced in March 2006. This is the first full genome
characterisation of HP H5N1 avian influenza A virus in the Nordic countries. The 
Danish viruses from this time period have their origin from the wild bird strains
from Qinghai in 2005. These viruses may have been introduced to the Northern
Europe through unusual migration due to the cold weather in Eastern Europe at
that time.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-4-43 
PMCID: PMC1876802
PMID: 17498292  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17694626

1. Vet Rec. 2007 Jul 21;161(3):100-1.

Outbreak of highly pathogenic avian influenza caused by Asian lineage H5N1 virus 
in turkeys in Great Britain in January 2007.

Irvine RM(1), Banks J, Londt BZ, Lister SA, Manvell RJ, Outtrim L, Russell C, Cox
WJ, Ceeraz V, Shell W, Landeg FJ, Wilesmith JW, Alexander DJ, Brown IH.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Department, VLA-Weybridge, Surrey KT15 3NB.

DOI: 10.1136/vr.161.3.100 
PMID: 17694626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21896207

1. Virol J. 2011 Sep 7;8:425. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-8-425.

A molecular and antigenic survey of H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza virus 
isolates from smallholder duck farms in Central Java, Indonesia during 2007-2008.

Wibawa H(1), Henning J, Wong F, Selleck P, Junaidi A, Bingham J, Daniels P, Meers
J.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO-Australian Animal Health Laboratory, Geelong, Victoria, Australia.
Hendra.Wibawa@csiro.au

BACKGROUND: Indonesia is one of the countries most severely affected by H5N1
highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) virus in terms of poultry and human
health. However, there is little information on the diversity of H5N1 viruses
circulating in backyard farms, where chickens and ducks often intermingle. In
this study, H5N1 virus infection occurring in 96 smallholder duck farms in
central Java, Indonesia from 2007-2008 was investigated and the molecular and
antigenic characteristics of H5N1 viruses isolated from these farms were
analysed.
RESULTS: All 84 characterised viruses belonged to H5N1 clade 2.1 with three virus
sublineages being identified: clade 2.1.1 (1), clade 2.1.3 (80), and
IDN/6/05-like viruses (3) that did not belong to any of the present clades. All
three clades were found in ducks, while only clade 2.1.3 was isolated from
chickens. There were no significant amino acid mutations of the hemagglutinin
(HA) and neuraminidase (NA) sites of the viruses, including the receptor binding,
glycosylation, antigenic and catalytic sites and NA inhibitor targets. All the
viruses had polybasic amino acids at the HA cleavage site. No evidence of major
antigenic variants was detected. Based on the HA gene, identical virus variants
could be found on different farms across the study sites and multiple genetic
variants could be isolated from HPAI outbreaks simultaneously or at different
time points from single farms. HPAI virus was isolated from both ducks and
chickens; however, the proportion of surviving duck cases was considerably higher
than in chickens.
CONCLUSIONS: The 2.1.3 clade was the most common lineage found in this study. All
the viruses had sequence characteristic of HPAI, but negligible variations in
other recognized amino acids at the HA and NA proteins which determine virus
phenotypes. Multiple genetic variants appeared to be circulating simultaneously
within poultry communities. The high proportion of live duck cases compared to
chickens over the study period suggests that ducks are more likely to survive
infection and they may better suit the role of long-term maintenance host for
H5N1. As some viruses were isolated from dead birds, there was no clear
correlation between genetic variations and pathogenicity of these viruses.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-8-425 
PMCID: PMC3179459
PMID: 21896207  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18774155

1. Virology. 2008 Oct 25;380(2):243-54. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2008.07.038. Epub 2008 
Sep 6.

The development and genetic diversity of H5N1 influenza virus in China,
1996-2006.

Duan L(1), Bahl J, Smith GJ, Wang J, Vijaykrishna D, Zhang LJ, Zhang JX, Li KS,
Fan XH, Cheung CL, Huang K, Poon LL, Shortridge KF, Webster RG, Peiris JS, Chen
H, Guan Y.

Author information: 
(1)International Institute of Infection and Immunity, Shantou University Medical 
College, Shantou 515031, Guangdong, China.

Since it was first detected in 1996, the Goose/Guangdong/1/1996 (Gs/GD) H5N1
influenza virus and its reassortants have spread to over 60 countries, with over 
20 distinct genetic reassortants previously recognized. However, systematic
analysis of their interrelationship and the development of genetic diversity have
not been explored. As each of those reassortants was first detected in China,
here 318 full-length H5N1 virus genomes isolated from 1996 to 2006 in this region
were phylogenetically analyzed. Our findings revealed two major group
reassortment events in 2001 and 2002 that were responsible for the generation of 
the majority of the 44 distinct Gs/GD genotypes identified, excepting those 1997 
variants. Genotype replacement and emergence occurred continually, with 34
transient genotypes detected while only 10 variants were persistent. Two major
replacements of predominant genotypes were also observed: genotype B replaced by 
Z in 2002 and then genotype Z replaced by the now predominant genotype V in 2005.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2008.07.038 
PMCID: PMC2651962
PMID: 18774155  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18976558

1. Emerg Infect Dis. 2008 Nov;14(11):1739-42. doi: 10.3201/eid1411.080683.

Influenza virus (H5N1) in live bird markets and food markets, Thailand.

Amonsin A(1), Choatrakol C, Lapkuntod J, Tantilertcharoen R, Thanawongnuwech R,
Suradhat S, Suwannakarn K, Theamboonlers A, Poovorawan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Chulalongkorn University, Pathumwan, Bangkok, Thailand.

A surveillance program for influenza A viruses (H5N1) was conducted in live bird 
and food markets in central Thailand during July 2006-August 2007. Twelve subtype
H5N1 viruses were isolated. The subtype H5N1 viruses circulating in the markets
were genetically related to those that circulated in Thailand during 2004-2005.

DOI: 10.3201/eid1411.080683 
PMCID: PMC2630752
PMID: 18976558  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19520524

1. Vet Microbiol. 2009 Oct 20;139(1-2):24-33. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2009.04.017.
Epub 2009 Apr 19.

Four different sublineages of highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 introduced
in Hungary in 2006-2007.

Szeleczky Z(1), Dán A, Ursu K, Ivanics E, Kiss I, Erdélyi K, Belák S, Muller CP, 
Brown IH, Bálint A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Central Agricultural Office Veterinary Diagnostic
Directorate, Budapest, Hungary.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 viruses were introduced to Hungary 
during 2006-2007 in three separate waves. This study aimed at determining the
full-length genomic coding regions of the index strains from these epizootics in 
order to: (i) understand the phylogenetic relationship to other European H5N1
isolates, (ii) elucidate the possible connection between the different outbreaks 
and (iii) determine the putative origin and way of introduction of the different 
virus variants. Molecular analysis of the HA gene of Hungarian HPAI isolates
obtained from wild birds during the first introduction revealed two groups
designated Hungarian1 (HUN1) and Hungarian2 (HUN2) within sublineage 2.2B and
clade 2.2.1, respectively. Sequencing the whole coding region of the two index
viruses A/mute swan/Hungary/3472/2006 and A/mute swan/4571/Hungary/2006 suggests 
the role of wild birds in the introduction of HUN1 and HUN2 viruses: the most
similar isolates to HUN1 and HUN2 group were found in wild avian species in
Croatia and Slovakia, respectively. The second introduction of HPAI H5N1 led to
the largest epizootic in domestic waterfowl in Europe. The index strain of the
epizootic A/goose/Hungary/14756/2006 clustered to sublineage 2.2.A1 forming the
Hungarian3 (HUN3) group. A common ancestry of HUN3 isolates with Bavarian strains
is suggested as the most likely scenario of origin. Hungarian4 (HUN4) viruses
isolated from the third introduction clustered with isolate A/turkey/United
Kingdom/750/2007 forming a sublineage 2.2.A2. The origin and way of introduction 
of HUN4 viruses is still obscure, thus further genetic, phylogenetic, ecological 
and epidemiological data are required in order to elucidate it.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2009.04.017 
PMID: 19520524  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21749770

1. Emerg Infect Dis. 2011 Jun;17(6):1060-3. doi: 10.3201/eid/1706.101406.

Novel reassortant highly pathogenic avian influenza (H5N5) viruses in domestic
ducks, China.

Gu M(1), Liu W, Cao Y, Peng D, Wang X, Wan H, Zhao G, Xu Q, Zhang W, Song Q, Li
Y, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Yangzhou University College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou, People's
Republic of China.

In China, domestic ducks and wild birds often share the same water, in which
influenza viruses replicate preferentially. Isolation of 2 novel reassortant
highly pathogenic avian influenza (H5N5) viruses from apparently healthy domestic
ducks highlights the role of these ducks as reassortment vessels. Such new
subtypes of influenza viruses may pose a pandemic threat.

DOI: 10.3201/eid/1706.101406 
PMCID: PMC3358203
PMID: 21749770  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16935377

1. Virus Res. 2006 Dec;122(1-2):194-9. Epub 2006 Aug 28.

Genetic characterization of influenza A viruses (H5N1) isolated from 3rd wave of 
Thailand AI outbreaks.

Amonsin A(1), Chutinimitkul S, Pariyothorn N, Songserm T, Damrongwantanapokin S, 
Puranaveja S, Jam-On R, Sae-Heng N, Payungporn S, Theamboonlers A, Chaisingh A,
Tantilertcharoen R, Suradhat S, Thanawongnuwech R, Poovorawan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn University, Pathumwan, Bangkok
10330, Thailand.

Three major outbreaks of avian influenza (AI) occurred in Thailand. During the
third episode in October 2005, we have isolated H5N1 viruses from one human case 
and three poultry cases. The whole genomes of AI viruses from human, chickens and
quail from the outbreaks were characterized. Sequence analysis of eight gene
segments revealed that the 2005 H5N1 viruses isolated in October 2005 were
closely related to those recovered from chicken, tiger(s) and human(s) in January
and July 2004. In addition, the genetic changes of the AI isolates at the HA
cleavage site have been observed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2006.06.016 
PMID: 16935377  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15681421

1. J Virol. 2005 Feb;79(4):2191-8.

Lethality to ferrets of H5N1 influenza viruses isolated from humans and poultry
in 2004.

Govorkova EA(1), Rehg JE, Krauss S, Yen HL, Guan Y, Peiris M, Nguyen TD, Hanh TH,
Puthavathana P, Long HT, Buranathai C, Lim W, Webster RG, Hoffmann E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 332 
N. Lauderdale, Memphis, TN 38105-2794, USA.

Erratum in
    J Virol. 2006 Jun;80(12):6195.

The 2004 outbreaks of H5N1 influenza viruses in Vietnam and Thailand were highly 
lethal to humans and to poultry; therefore, newly emerging avian influenza A
viruses pose a continued threat, not only to avian species but also to humans. We
studied the pathogenicity of four human and nine avian H5N1/04 influenza viruses 
in ferrets (an excellent model for influenza studies). All four human isolates
were fatal to intranasally inoculated ferrets. The human isolate
A/Vietnam/1203/04 (H5N1) was the most pathogenic isolate; the severity of disease
was associated with a broad tissue tropism and high virus titers in multiple
organs, including the brain. High fever, weight loss, anorexia, extreme lethargy,
and diarrhea were observed. Two avian H5N1/04 isolates were as pathogenic as the 
human viruses, causing lethal systemic infections in ferrets. Seven of nine
H5N1/04 viruses isolated from avian species caused mild infections, with virus
replication restricted to the upper respiratory tract. All chicken isolates were 
nonlethal to ferrets. A sequence analysis revealed polybasic amino acids in the
hemagglutinin connecting peptides of all H5N1/04 viruses, indicating that
multiple molecular differences in other genes are important for a high level of
virulence. Interestingly, the human A/Vietnam/1203/04 isolate had a lysine
substitution at position 627 of PB2 and had one to eight amino acid changes in
all gene products except that of the M1 gene, unlike the A/chicken/Vietnam/C58/04
and A/quail/Vietnam/36/04 viruses. Our results indicate that viruses that are
lethal to mammals are circulating among birds in Asia and suggest that
pathogenicity in ferrets, and perhaps humans, reflects a complex combination of
different residues rather than a single amino acid difference.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.4.2191-2198.2005 
PMCID: PMC546577
PMID: 15681421  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19058578

1. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health. 2008 Sep;39(5):837-47.

Genetic characterization of nonstructural genes of H5N1 avian influenza viruses
isolated in Thailand in 2004-2005.

Suwannakhon N(1), Pookorn S, Sanguansermsri D, Chamnanpood C, Chamnanpood P,
Wongvilairat R, Pongcharoen S, Niumsup PR, Kunthalert D, Sanguansermsri P.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medical Sciences, Naresuan University, Phitsanulok, Thailand.

The outbreak of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) viruses has severely
disrupted poultry production and trade. Humans have been infected with HPAI H5N1 
viruses and many have died. The nonstructural (NS) proteins of the virus are a
factor that determines virulence. In this report, 80 NS genes of H5N1 HPAI
viruses isolated from Thailand were completely sequenced and phylogenically
analyzed. The percentages of identity and variable site NS1 genes were similar to
NS2/nuclear export protein (NEP) genes. All NS1 genes from the samples were
located in allelic group A. The NS1 and NS2/NEP proteins possess 225 and 121
amino acids, respectively. All NS1 protein samples had five amino acid deletions 
typical of avian influenza viruses isolated since 2002. An amino acid
substitution at position 92 (G92E) of the NS1 protein, known to promote the
inhibition of host immune responses, was also found in the samples.


PMID: 19058578  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18202945

1. Avian Pathol. 2008 Feb;37(1):15-23. doi: 10.1080/03079450701774835.

Double introduction of highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza virus into France
in early 2006.

Gall-Reculé GL(1), Briand FX, Schmitz A, Guionie O, Massin P, Jestin V.

Author information: 
(1)French Agency for Food Safety (AFSSA), Avian and Rabbit Virology, Immunology
and Parasitology Unit, French Reference Laboratory for Avian Influenza and
Newcastle Disease, B.P. 53, 22440 Ploufragan, France.
g.legall@ploufragan.afssa.fr

Highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) viruses of subtype H5N1 have spread
since late 2003 in East and Southeast Asia. In April 2005, a large-scale outbreak
of H5N1 infection that occurred in migratory waterfowl in Qinghai Lake nature
reserve in western China, killing more than 6000 wild birds, appeared to be the
beginning of a epizootic that caused outbreaks in domestic and wild birds in
nearly 60 countries from Central Asia, the Middle East, Europe and Africa. The
first case of Asian lineage HPAI H5N1 virus in France was described in dead wild 
ducks (Common pochard) in the east of France in mid-February 2006. Up to the end 
of April, 42 HPAI H5N1 viruses were identified from about 60 wild birds belonging
to different species and one outbreak occurred in commercial turkeys. To
establish genetic relationships with other HPAI H5N1 viruses, 12 selected viruses
were subjected to phylogenetic analysis. Genotyping and genetic analyses revealed
that the French viruses were very similar to those of the 'Qinghai-like'
sublineage and belonged to clade 2.2. However, two related but distinct genetic
subgroups were identified, indicating that two different viruses were circulating
in France at the same time and in the same area. Viruses of one subgroup were
highly similar to one identified in Bavaria in Germany
(A/mallard/Bavaria/1/2006). More surprisingly, French viruses belonging to the
other subgroup retained the cleavage motif PQGERKRKKR/G, which is unique among
the known HPAI H5N1 viruses. Our results confirmed that multiple H5N1 genogroups 
were present in Western Europe in early 2006.

DOI: 10.1080/03079450701774835 
PMID: 18202945  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20521713

1. Avian Dis. 2010 Mar;54(1 Suppl):673-6.

Genetic characterization of variant strains of highly pathogenic avian influenza 
H5N1 that escaped detection by real-time reverse transcriptase-PCR diagnostic
tests.

Arafa AS(1), Selim AA, Hassan MK, Aly MM.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory for Veterinary Quality Control on Poultry Production, P.O.
Box 264, Dokki, Giza, Egypt 12618. araby85@hotmail.com

The highly pathogenic avian influenza virus of subtype H5N1 that caused serious
outbreaks in Egypt in 2006 was efficiently detected using a commercially
available real-time reverse transcriptase-PCR (RRT-PCR) for the type A specific
matrix (M) gene in field samples of cloacal and tracheal swabs. RRT-PCR was also 
used for subtyping and confirmation of H5 subtype. During late 2007 the National 
Laboratory for Veterinary Quality Control on Poultry Production detected five
field cases that were positive for avian influenza virus (AIV) based on the M
gene RRT-PCR. Three different commercial H5 RRT-PCRs were used for identification
of the H5 subtype, as well as a published World Organization for Animal Health
(OIE) H5 RRT-PCR that had been previously carefully validated. The five cases had
positive results for the H5 gene using the published OIE H5 RRT-PCR, but the
three commercial H5 RRT-PCRs tests only returned two to four positive results out
of the five positive cases. The hemagglutinin gene (HA) sequencing analysis of
these five isolates showed multiple nucleotide substitution mutations, suggesting
genetic variation that could affect the H5 primer and/or probe binding sequences.
These data highlight the importance of continued monitoring of RRT-PCR primers
and probes to ensure that sensitivity and specificity are maintained. The use of 
conventional methods in national and reference AIV laboratories, including virus 
isolation, serologic subtyping, and alternative RRT-PCR primers, is necessary to 
detect the newly emerging variant H5N1 strains that affect diagnostic
performance.

DOI: 10.1637/8720-032109-ResNote.1 
PMID: 20521713  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17553267

1. Emerg Infect Dis. 2007 Apr;13(4):539-46.

Influenza (H5N1) viruses in poultry, Russian Federation, 2005-2006.

Lipatov AS(1), Evseenko VA, Yen HL, Zaykovskaya AV, Durimanov AG, Zolotykh SI,
Netesov SV, Drozdov IG, Onishchenko GG, Webster RG, Shestopalov AM.

Author information: 
(1)St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

We studied 7 influenza (H5N1) viruses isolated from poultry in western Siberia
and the European part of the Russian Federation during July 2005-February 2006.
Full genome sequences showed high homology to Qinghai-like influenza (H5N1)
viruses. Phylogenetic analysis not only showed a close genetic relationship
between the H5N1 strains isolated from poultry and wild migratory waterfowls but 
also suggested genetic reassortment among the analyzed isolates. Analysis of
deduced amino acid sequences of the M2 and neuraminidase proteins showed that all
isolates are potentially sensitive to currently available antiviral drugs.
Pathogenicity testing showed that all studied viruses were highly pathogenic in
chickens; for 3 isolates tested in mice and 2 tested in ferrets, pathogenicity
was heterogeneous. Pathogenicity in mammalian models was generally correlated
with Lys at residue 627 of polymerase basic protein 2.

DOI: 10.3201/eid1304.061266 
PMCID: PMC2725974
PMID: 17553267  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29574145

1. Antiviral Res. 2018 May;153:95-100. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2018.03.007. Epub
2018 Mar 21.

Identification of Indonesian clade 2.1 highly pathogenic influenza A(H5N1)
viruses with N294S and S246N neuraminidase substitutions which further reduce
oseltamivir susceptibility.

McKimm-Breschkin JL(1), Barrett S(2), Wong FYK(3), Pudjiatmoko(4), Azhar M(5),
Selleck P(6), Davies KR(7), Hartaningsih N(8), McGrane J(9).

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Manufacturing, 343 Royal Parade, Parkville, 3052 Australia. Electronic
address: jmbivrology@gmail.com.
(2)CSIRO Manufacturing, 343 Royal Parade, Parkville, 3052 Australia. Electronic
address: susan.barrett@csiro.au.
(3)CSIRO Australian Animal Health Laboratory, Geelong, Australia. Electronic
address: frank.wong@csiro.au.
(4)Directorate of Animal Health, Directorate General of Livestock and Animal
Health Services, Ministry of Agriculture, Jakarta, Indonesia. Electronic address:
pudjiatmoko1@yahoo.com.
(5)Directorate of Animal Health, Directorate General of Livestock and Animal
Health Services, Ministry of Agriculture, Jakarta, Indonesia. Electronic address:
Azhar_drh@yahoo.com.
(6)CSIRO Australian Animal Health Laboratory, Geelong, Australia.
(7)CSIRO Australian Animal Health Laboratory, Geelong, Australia. Electronic
address: kelly.davies@csiro.au.
(8)Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Emergency Centre for
Transboundary Animal Diseases (ECTAD), Jakarta, Indonesia. Electronic address:
drnining@gmail.com.
(9)Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Emergency Centre for
Transboundary Animal Diseases (ECTAD), Jakarta, Indonesia. Electronic address:
James.McGrane@fao.org.

We have tested the in vitro susceptibility to the neuraminidase (NA) inhibitors
of 96 highly pathogenic clade 2.1 A(H5N1) viruses from Indonesia, isolated
between 2008 and 2011. HPAI virus samples obtained through the Influenza Virus
Monitoring (IVM) surveillance program in Indonesia were tested for susceptibility
to oseltamivir and zanamivir. The NAs of four viruses were identified as extreme 
outliers to oseltamivir, based on statistical analysis by box plots, with IC50
values ranging from 46 to 62 nM. The NAs of two of these viruses from Sumatra and
Aceh, had an N294S substitution, while one virus from Sulawesi had an S246N NA
substitution. The NAs of all four viruses showed a specific loss of slow binding 
to oseltamivir in an IC50 kinetics assay. As observed in our previous
surveillance, there was only a minimal effect on the sensitivity to zanamivir or 
peramivir for these mutants or any of the other isolates tested. The continued
circulation of subtype H5N1 viruses in avian species poses an on-going zoonotic
threat. The fact that we continue to identify avian isolates with naturally
occurring mutations conferring reduced oseltamivir susceptibility remains a
concern, given oseltamivir will be a key antiviral in the event of a new pandemic
emerging.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2018.03.007 
PMID: 29574145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21327896

1. Virus Genes. 2011 Jun;42(3):363-8. doi: 10.1007/s11262-011-0583-y. Epub 2011 Feb 
17.

Host-specific genetic variation of highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses
(H5N1).

Ibrahim MS(1), Watanabe Y, Ellakany HF, Yamagishi A, Sapsutthipas S, Toyoda T,
Abd El-Hamied HS, Ikuta K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka
University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. madihasalah@yahoo.com

The complete genome sequences of two isolates A/chicken/Egypt/CL6/07 (CL6/07) and
A/duck/Egypt/D2br10/07 (D2br10/07) of highly pathogenic avian influenza virus
(HPAI) H5N1 isolated at the beginning of 2007 outbreak in Egypt were determined
and compared with all Egyptian HPAI H5N1 sequences available in the GenBank.
Sequence analysis utilizing the RNA from the original tissue homogenate showed
amino acid substitutions in seven of the viral segments in both samples.
Interestingly, these changes were different between the CL6/07 and D2br10/07 when
compared to other Egyptian isolates. Moreover, phylogenetic analysis showed
independent sub-clustering of the two viruses within the Egyptian sequences
signifying a possible differential adaptation in the two hosts. Further,
pre-amplification analysis of H5N1 might be necessary for accurate data
interpretation and identification of distinct factor(s) influencing the evolution
of the virus in different poultry species.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-011-0583-y 
PMCID: PMC3112484
PMID: 21327896  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10074191

1. J Virol. 1999 Apr;73(4):3366-74.

Rapid evolution of H5N1 influenza viruses in chickens in Hong Kong.

Zhou NN(1), Shortridge KF, Claas EC, Krauss SL, Webster RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology and Molecular Biology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

The H5N1 avian influenza virus that killed 6 of 18 persons infected in Hong Kong 
in 1997 was transmitted directly from poultry to humans. Viral isolates from this
outbreak may provide molecular clues to zoonotic transfer. Here we demonstrate
that the H5N1 viruses circulating in poultry comprised two distinguishable
phylogenetic lineages in all genes that were in very rapid evolution. When
introduced into new hosts, influenza viruses usually undergo rapid alteration of 
their surface glycoproteins, especially in the hemagglutinin (HA). Surprisingly, 
these H5N1 isolates had a large proportion of amino acid changes in all gene
products except in the HA. These viruses maybe reassortants each of whose HA gene
is well adapted to domestic poultry while the rest of the genome arises from a
different source. The consensus amino acid sequences of "internal" virion
proteins reveal amino acids previously found in human strains. These
human-specific amino acids may be important factors in zoonotic transmission.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.73.4.3366-3374.1999 
PMCID: PMC104101
PMID: 10074191  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27199961

1. Front Microbiol. 2016 May 6;7:635. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00635. eCollection
2016.

Pathogenicity, Transmission and Antigenic Variation of H5N1 Highly Pathogenic
Avian Influenza Viruses.

Jiao P(1), Song H(1), Liu X(2), Song Y(1), Cui J(3), Wu S(1), Ye J(1), Qu N(1),
Zhang T(4), Liao M(1).

Author information: 
(1)National and Regional Joint Engineering Laboratory for Medicament of Zoonosis 
Prevention and ControlGuangzhou, China; Key Laboratory of Animal Vaccine
Development, Ministry of AgricultureGuangzhou, China; Key Laboratory of Zoonosis 
Prevention and Control of GuangdongGuangzhou, China; College of Veterinary
Medicine, South China Agricultural UniversityGuangzhou, China.
(2)National and Regional Joint Engineering Laboratory for Medicament of Zoonosis 
Prevention and ControlGuangzhou, China; Pulike Biological Engineering
Inc.Luoyang, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Animal Vaccine Development, Ministry of
AgricultureGuangzhou, China; Key Laboratory of Zoonosis Prevention and Control of
GuangdongGuangzhou, China; College of Veterinary Medicine, South China
Agricultural UniversityGuangzhou, China.
(4)College of Engineering, South China Agricultural University Guangzhou, China.

H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) was one of the most important avian
diseases in poultry production of China, especially in Guangdong province. In
recent years, new H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses (HPAIV) still
emerged constantly, although all poultry in China were immunized with H5N1
vaccinations compulsorily. To better understand the pathogenicity and
transmission of dominant clades of the H5N1 HPAIVs in chicken from Guangdong in
2012, we chose a clade 7.2 avian influenza virus named
A/Chicken/China/G2/2012(H5N1) (G2) and a clade 2.3.2.1 avian influenza virus
named A/Duck/China/G3/2012(H5N1) (G3) in our study. Our results showed that the
chickens inoculated with 10(3) EID50 of G2 or G3 viruses all died, and the titers
of virus replication detected in several visceral organs were high but different.
In the naive contact groups, virus shedding was not detected in G2 group and all 
chickens survived, but virus shedding was detected in G3 group and all chickens
died. These results showed that the two clades of H5N1 HPAIVs had high
pathogenicity in chickens and the contact transmission of them was different in
chickens. The results of cross reactive HI assay showed that antigens of G2 and
G3 were very different from those of current commercial vaccines isolates (Re-4, 
Re-6, and D7). And to evaluate the protective efficacy of three vaccines against 
most isolates form Guangdong belonging to clade 2.3.2.1 in 2012, G3 was chosen to
challenge the three vaccines such as Re-4, Re-6, and D7. First, chickens were
immunized with 0.3 ml Re-4, Re-6, and D7 inactivated vaccines by intramuscular
injection, respectively, and then challenged with 10(6) EID50 of G3 on day 28
post-vaccination. The D7 vaccine had 100% protection against G3 for chickens, the
Re-6 vaccine had 88.9%, and the Re-4 vaccine only had 66.7%. Our results
suggested that the D7 vaccine could prevent and control H5N1 virus outbreaks more
effectively in Guangdong. From the above, it was necessary to conduct
continuously epidemiological survey and study the pathogenicity and antigenic
variation of avian influenza in Southern China.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00635 
PMCID: PMC4858587
PMID: 27199961 


27174088

1. Infect Genet Evol. 2016 Sep;43:173-8. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2016.05.012. Epub
2016 May 10.

Multiple introductions of a reassortant H5N1 avian influenza virus of clade
2.3.2.1c with PB2 gene of H9N2 subtype into Indian poultry.

Tosh C(1), Nagarajan S(2), Kumar M(2), Murugkar HV(2), Venkatesh G(2), Shukla
S(2), Mishra A(2), Mishra P(2), Agarwal S(2), Singh B(2), Dubey P(2), Tripathi
S(2), Kulkarni DD(2).

Author information: 
(1)ICAR-National Institute of High Security Animal Diseases, Bhopal 462 022,
India. Electronic address: chakradhar.tosh@gmail.com.
(2)ICAR-National Institute of High Security Animal Diseases, Bhopal 462 022,
India.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 viruses are a threat to poultry in 
Asia, Europe, Africa and North America. Here, we report isolation and
characterization of H5N1 viruses isolated from ducks and turkeys in Kerala,
Chandigarh and Uttar Pradesh, India between November 2014 and March 2015. Genetic
and phylogenetic analyses of haemagglutinin gene identified that the virus
belonged to a new clade 2.3.2.1c which has not been detected earlier in Indian
poultry. The virus possessed molecular signature for high pathogenicity to
chickens, which was corroborated by intravenous pathogenicity index of 2.96. The 
virus was a reassortant which derives its PB2 gene from H9N2 virus isolated in
China during 2007-2013. However, the neuraminidase and internal genes are of H5N1
subtype. Phylogenetic and network analysis revealed that after detection in China
in 2013/2014, the virus moved to Europe, West Africa and other Asian countries
including India. The analyses further indicated multiple introductions of H5N1
virus in Indian poultry and internal spread in Kerala. One of the outbreaks in
ducks in Kerala is linked to the H5N1 virus isolated from wild birds in Dubai
suggesting movement of virus probably through migration of wild birds. However,
the outbreaks in ducks in Chandigarh and Uttar Pradesh were from an unknown
source in Asia which also contributed gene pools to the outbreaks in Europe and
West Africa. The widespread incidence of the novel H5N1 HPAI is similar to the
spread of clade 2.2 ("Qinghai-like") virus in 2005, and should be monitored to
avoid threat to animal and public health.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2016.05.012 
PMID: 27174088  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19088292

1. J Gen Virol. 2009 Jan;90(Pt 1):216-22. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.005660-0.

Indigenous sources of 2007-2008 H5N1 avian influenza outbreaks in Thailand.

Chaichoune K(1), Wiriyarat W, Thitithanyanont A, Phonarknguen R, Sariya L,
Suwanpakdee S, Noimor T, Chatsurachai S, Suriyaphol P, Ungchusak K, Ratanakorn P,
Webster RG, Thompson M, Auewarakul P, Puthavathana P.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Science, Mahidol University, Nakhon Pathom 73170,
Thailand.

Outbreaks of H5N1 avian influenza show strong seasonality. It is not clear where 
the source of virus originates from in each new outbreak season. This study
sought to understand the nature of viral resurgence in recent outbreak seasons in
Thailand, where the epidemic is relatively well controlled. In such a situation, 
indigenous viruses surviving the inter-outbreak season would have to pass through
a bottleneck. In order to look for evidence of the bottleneck effect, viral
genome sequences from recent outbreaks in the country were analysed. H5N1 avian
influenza viruses were isolated from six outbreaks in the rainy season and winter
of 2007 through to early 2008. Most of the outbreaks were in the Yom-Nan River
basin in the southern part of the northern region of the country. Sequences of
these viral isolates were identified as clade 1, genotype Z, similar to viruses
from previous years in the central region of the country. The sequences clustered
into two groups, one of which was closely related to viruses isolated from the
same area in July 2006. These analyses indicated that there was a strong
bottleneck effect on the virus population and that only a few lineages remained
in the area. In addition, evidence of reassortment among these viruses was found.
These indicated re-emergence of viruses from a small pool of indigenous sources
that had been silently perpetuated over the dry summer months. Therefore, an
approach to eradicate H5N1 avian influenza from the area by eliminating these
local reservoirs may be feasible and should be seriously considered.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.005660-0 
PMID: 19088292  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24722680

1. J Gen Virol. 2014 Jul;95(Pt 7):1444-1463. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.063495-0. Epub 2014 
Apr 10.

Molecular characterization of avian influenza H5N1 virus in Egypt and the
emergence of a novel endemic subclade.

El-Shesheny R(1), Kandeil A(1), Bagato O(1), Maatouq AM(1), Moatasim Y(1), Rubrum
A(2), Song MS(2), Webby RJ(2), Ali MA(1), Kayali G(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Research Centre, Giza, Egypt.
(2)St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Clade 2.2 highly pathogenic H5N1 viruses have been in continuous circulation in
Egyptian poultry since 2006. Their persistence caused significant genetic drift
that led to the reclassification of these viruses into subclades 2.2.1 and
2.2.1.1. Here, we conducted full-genome sequence and phylogenetic analyses of 45 
H5N1 isolated during 2006-2013 through systematic surveillance in Egypt, and 53
viruses that were sequenced previously and available in the public domain.
Results indicated that H5N1 viruses in Egypt continue to evolve and a new
distinct cluster has emerged. Mutations affecting viral virulence, pathogenicity,
transmission, receptor-binding preference and drug resistance were studied. In
light of our findings that H5N1 in Egypt continues to evolve, surveillance and
molecular studies need to be sustained.

© 2014 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.063495-0 
PMCID: PMC4059266
PMID: 24722680  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19428743

1. Virus Res. 2009 Jun;142(1-2):108-20. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2009.01.019. Epub
2009 Feb 10.

Phylogenetic and biological characterization of highly pathogenic H5N1 avian
influenza viruses (Vietnam 2005) in chickens and ducks.

Pfeiffer J(1), Pantin-Jackwood M, To TL, Nguyen T, Suarez DL.

Author information: 
(1)Southeast Poultry Research Laboratory, USDA, ARS, 934 College Station Road,
Athens, GA 30605, USA.

Analysis of Asian H5N1 avian influenza (AI) virus hemagglutinin (HA) genes shows 
a common origin, but the virus has evolved into at least three major clades
(clades 0, 1, and 2) over the last 13 years. Previous reports of Vietnam viruses 
have documented predominantly clade 1 viruses. Unexpectedly, 19 viruses from
northern Vietnam isolated in December 2005 fell into clade 2. These viruses
further clustered into two distinct sublineages. Representative viruses from each
sublineage were chosen for antigenic and pathogenic evaluation. Two distinct
antigenic groups correlating with the genetic information were present when
comparing hemagglutination inhibition (HI) titers. All viruses were highly
virulent not only in chickens, killing them within 2 days of experimental
inoculation, but also in 2- and 5-week-old Pekin ducks, causing 100% mortality
within 4 days of challenge. The information gained about these viruses provides
insight with regards to implementing control programs, including vaccine seed
strain selection.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2009.01.019 
PMID: 19428743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21977732

1. Jpn J Vet Res. 2011 Aug;59(2-3):89-100.

An H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza virus that invaded Japan through
waterfowl migration.

Kajihara M(1), Matsuno K, Simulundu E, Muramatsu M, Noyori O, Manzoor R, Nakayama
E, Igarashi M, Tomabechi D, Yoshida R, Okamatsu M, Sakoda Y, Ito K, Kida H,
Takada A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Global Epidemiology, Hokkaido University Research Center for
Zoonosis Control, Sapporo 001-0020, Japan.

In 2010, an H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza virus (HPAIV) was isolated
from feces of apparently healthy ducks migrating southward in Hokkaido, the
northernmost prefecture of Japan. The H5N1 HPAIVs were subsequently detected in
domestic and wild birds at multiple sites corresponding to the flyway of the
waterfowl having stopovers in the Japanese archipelago. The Hokkaido isolate was 
genetically nearly identical to H5N1 HPAIVs isolated from swans in the spring of 
2009 and 2010 in Mongolia, but less pathogenic in experimentally infected ducks
than the 2009 Mongolian isolate. These findings suggest that H5N1 HPAIVs with
relatively mild pathogenicity might be selected and harbored in the waterfowl
population during the 2009-2010 migration seasons. Our data provide "early
warning" signals for preparedness against the unprecedented situation in which
the waterfowl reservoirs serve as perpetual sources and disseminators of HPAIVs.


PMID: 21977732  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17728231

1. J Virol. 2007 Nov;81(21):11612-9. Epub 2007 Aug 29.

Characterization of low-pathogenicity H5N1 avian influenza viruses from North
America.

Spackman E(1), Swayne DE, Suarez DL, Senne DA, Pedersen JC, Killian ML, Pasick J,
Handel K, Pillai SP, Lee CW, Stallknecht D, Slemons R, Ip HS, Deliberto T.

Author information: 
(1)Southeast Poultry Research Laboratory, U.S. Department of
Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service, 934 College Station Road, Athens, GA
30605, USA. Erica.Spackman@ars.usda.gov

Wild-bird surveillance in North America for avian influenza (AI) viruses with a
goal of early identification of the Asian H5N1 highly pathogenic AI virus has
identified at least six low-pathogenicity H5N1 AI viruses between 2004 and 2006. 
The hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) genes from all 6 H5N1 viruses and
an additional 38 North American wild-bird-origin H5 subtype and 28 N1 subtype
viruses were sequenced and compared with sequences available in GenBank by
phylogenetic analysis. Both HA and NA were phylogenetically distinct from those
for viruses from outside of North America and from those for viruses recovered
from mammals. Four of the H5N1 AI viruses were characterized as low pathogenicity
by standard in vivo pathotyping tests. One of the H5N1 viruses,
A/MuteSwan/MI/451072-2/06, was shown to replicate to low titers in chickens,
turkeys, and ducks. However, transmission of A/MuteSwan/MI/451072-2/06 was more
efficient among ducks than among chickens or turkeys based on virus shed. The 50%
chicken infectious dose for A/MuteSwan/MI/451072-2/06 and three other
wild-waterfowl-origin H5 viruses were also determined and were between 10(5.3)
and 10(7.5) 50% egg infective doses. Finally, seven H5 viruses representing
different phylogenetic clades were evaluated for their antigenic relatedness by
hemagglutination inhibition assay, showing that the antigenic relatedness was
largely associated with geographic origin. Overall, the data support the
conclusion that North American H5 wild-bird-origin AI viruses are
low-pathogenicity wild-bird-adapted viruses and are antigenically and genetically
distinct from the highly pathogenic Asian H5N1 virus lineage.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01368-07 
PMCID: PMC2168782
PMID: 17728231  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22806090

1. Arch Virol. 2012 Nov;157(11):2113-23. doi: 10.1007/s00705-012-1411-y. Epub 2012
Jul 18.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza (H5N1) in Myanmar, 2006-2010.

Mon PP(1), Lapkuntod J, Maw MT, Nuansrichay B, Parchariyanon S, Tiensin T, Htun
T, Padungtod P, Kalpravidh W, Sunn K, Maclean M, Amonsin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Public Health, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok
10330, Thailand.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) virus subtype H5N1 was first reported in
Myanmar in 2006. In this study, we have characterized 6 HPAI (H5N1) viruses
recovered from 2007-2010 as well as three additional available nucleotide
sequences representing Myanmar AI outbreaks. Phylogenetic analysis showed that
the Myanmar viruses belong to HPAI (H5N1) clades 7, 2.3.2 and 2.3.4. The result
suggested that the HPAI (H5N1) viruses recovered from Myanmar had been introduced
into the country by multiple introductions. Genetic analysis of the viruses
confirmed the HPAI characteristics of the viruses.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-012-1411-y 
PMID: 22806090  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17553279

1. Emerg Infect Dis. 2007 Apr;13(4):611-3.

Genetic characterization of HPAI (H5N1) viruses from poultry and wild vultures,
Burkina Faso.

Ducatez MF(1), Tarnagda Z, Tahita MC, Sow A, de Landtsheer S, Londt BZ, Brown IH,
Osterhaus DM, Fouchier RA, Ouedraogo JB, Muller CP.

Author information: 
(1)National Public Health Laboratory, Luxembourg.

Genetic analysis of highly pathogenic avian influenza (H5N1) viruses from poultry
and hooded vultures in Burkina Faso shows that these viruses belong to 1 of 3
sublineages initially found in Nigeria and later in other African countries.
Hooded vultures could potentially be vectors or sentinels of influenza subtype
H5N1, as are cats and swans elsewhere.

DOI: 10.3201/eid1304.061356 
PMCID: PMC2725980
PMID: 17553279  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22113008

1. J Gen Virol. 2012 Mar;93(Pt 3):541-550. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.037572-0. Epub 2011
Nov 23.

Reintroduction of H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza virus by migratory water
birds, causing poultry outbreaks in the 2010-2011 winter season in Japan.

Sakoda Y(1), Ito H(2)(3), Uchida Y(4), Okamatsu M(1), Yamamoto N(1), Soda
K(2)(1), Nomura N(1), Kuribayashi S(1), Shichinohe S(1), Sunden Y(5), Umemura
T(5), Usui T(6)(2), Ozaki H(7)(2), Yamaguchi T(6)(2), Murase T(7)(2), Ito
T(2)(3), Saito T(4), Takada A(8), Kida H(9)(8)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Microbiology, Department of Disease Control, Graduate School of 
Veterinary Medicine, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0818, Japan.
(2)Avian Zoonosis Research Center, Faculty of Agriculture, Tottori University,
Tottori 680-8553, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Veterinary Public Health, Faculty of Agriculture, Tottori
University, Tottori 680-8553, Japan.
(4)Research Team for Zoonotic Diseases, National Institute of Animal Health,
Tsukuba 305-0856, Japan.
(5)Laboratory of Comparative Pathology, Department of Veterinary Clinical
Sciences, Graduate School of Veterinary Medicine, Hokkaido University, Sapporo
060-0818, Japan.
(6)Laboratory of Veterinary Hygiene, Faculty of Agriculture, Tottori University, 
Tottori 680-8553, Japan.
(7)Laboratory of Veterinary Microbiology, Faculty of Agriculture, Tottori
University, Tottori 680-8553, Japan.
(8)Research Center for Zoonosis Control, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 001-0020,
Japan.
(9)Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), 4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi 332-0012,
Japan.

H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza virus (HPAIV) was reintroduced and caused 
outbreaks in chickens in the 2010-2011 winter season in Japan, which had been
free from highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) since 2007 when HPAI outbreaks
occurred and were controlled. On 14 October 2010 at Lake Ohnuma, Wakkanai, the
northernmost part of Hokkaido, Japan, H5N1 HPAIVs were isolated from faecal
samples of ducks flying from their nesting lakes in Siberia. Since then, in
Japan, H5N1 HPAIVs have been isolated from 63 wild birds in 17 prefectures and
caused HPAI outbreaks in 24 chicken farms in nine prefectures by the end of March
in 2011. Each of these isolates was genetically closely related to the HPAIV
isolates at Lake Ohnuma, and those in China, Mongolia, Russia and Korea,
belonging to genetic clade 2.3.2.1. In addition, these isolates were genetically 
classified into three groups, suggesting that the viruses were transmitted by
migratory water birds through at least three different routes from their northern
territory to Japan. These isolates were antigenic variants, which is consistent
with selection in poultry under the immunological pressure induced by
vaccination. To prevent the perpetuation of viruses in the lakes where water
birds nest in summer in Siberia, prompt eradication of HPAIVs in poultry is
urgently needed in Asian countries where HPAI has not been controlled.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.037572-0 
PMID: 22113008  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21904849

1. Virus Genes. 2012 Feb;44(1):55-62. doi: 10.1007/s11262-011-0667-8. Epub 2011 Sep 
9.

Characterisation of a highly pathogenic H5N1 clade 2.3.2 influenza virus isolated
from swans in Shanghai, China.

Zhao G(1), Zhong L, Lu X, Hu J, Gu X, Kai Y, Song Q, Sun Q, Liu J, Peng D, Wang
X, Liu X, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, Jiangsu,
People's Republic of China.

In spring 2009, one strain of H5N1 clade 2.3.2 virus was isolated from wild swans
in Shanghai, indicating the importance of the wild swan in the ecology of this
highly pathogenic avian influenza virus (HPAIV) in Eastern China. Pathogenicity
experiments conducted in this study indicated that the virus was highly
pathogenic for chickens but lowly pathogenic for mammalian hosts, as evidenced by
reduced infection of mice. The analysis of complete genome sequences and genetic 
evolution showed that A/Swan/Shanghai/10/09 (SW/SH/09) may be derived from the
strain A/silky chicken/Shantou/475/2004 (CK/ST/04), which is homologous to the
influenza viruses isolated from chicken, duck, pika, little egret, swan, mandarin
duck and bar-headed goose in China Hunan, China Qinghai, Mongolia, Russia, Japan,
Korea, Laos and Hong Kong during 2007-2011, indicating that the virus has
retro-infected diverse wild birds from chicken, and significant spread of the
virus is still ongoing through overlapping migratory flyways. On the basis of the
molecular analysis, we also found that there was a deletion of the glycosylation 
site (NSS) in amino acid 156 of the hemagglutinin (HA) protein when compared with
that of the other Clade 2.3.2 viruses isolated between 2007 and 2011. More
importantly, the sequence analysis of SW/SH/09 virus displayed the drug-resistant
mutations on the matrix protein (M2) and neuraminidase (NA) genes.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-011-0667-8 
PMID: 21904849  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12077307

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Jun 25;99(13):8950-5. Epub 2002 Jun 19.

Emergence of multiple genotypes of H5N1 avian influenza viruses in Hong Kong SAR.

Guan Y(1), Peiris JS, Lipatov AS, Ellis TM, Dyrting KC, Krauss S, Zhang LJ,
Webster RG, Shortridge KF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong
Kong SAR, China.

Although A/Hong Kong/156/97 (H5N1/97)-like viruses associated with the "bird flu"
incident in Hong Kong SAR have not been detected since the slaughter of poultry
in 1997, its putative precursors continue to persist in the region. One of these,
Goose/Guangdong/1/96 (H5N1 Gs/Gd)-like viruses, reassorted with other avian
viruses to generate multiple genotypes of H5N1 viruses that crossed to chickens
and other terrestrial poultry from its reservoir in geese. Whereas none of these 
recent reassortants had acquired the gene constellation of H5N1/97, these events 
provide insight into how such a virus may have been generated. The recent H5N1
reassortants readily infect and kill chicken and quail after experimental
infection, and some were associated with significant mortality of chickens within
the poultry retail markets in Hong Kong. Some genotypes are lethal for mice after
intra-nasal inoculation and spread to the brain. On this occasion, the early
detection of H5N1 viruses in the retail, live poultry markets led to preemptive
intervention before the occurrence of human disease, but these newly emerging,
highly pathogenic H5N1 viruses provide cause for pandemic concern.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.132268999 
PMCID: PMC124404
PMID: 12077307  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28770175

1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2017 Jul 19;7:328. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00328.
eCollection 2017.

Phylogeny, Pathogenicity, and Transmission of H5N1 Avian Influenza Viruses in
Chickens.

Cui J(1)(2)(3), Qu N(1)(2)(3), Guo Y(1)(2)(3), Cao L(1)(4), Wu S(1)(2)(3), Mei
K(1)(2)(3), Sun H(1)(2)(3), Lu Y(5)(6), Qin Z(5), Jiao P(1)(2)(3), Liao
M(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Infectious Diseases Laboratory, College of Veterinary Medicine, South
China Agricultural UniversityGuangzhou, China.
(2)National and Regional Joint Engineering Laboratory for Medicament of Zoonosis 
Prevention and ControlGuangzhou, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Ministry of AgricultureGuangzhou, China.
(4)Guangzhou Center for Disease Control and PreventionGuangzhou, China.
(5)Animal & Plant Inspection and Quarantine Technology Center of Shenzhen
Entry-Exit Inspection and Quarantine Bureau of ChinaShenzhen, China.
(6)Department of Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Oceanography,
Shenzhen UniversityShenzhen, China.

We analyzed five H5N1 avian influenza viruses (AIVs) isolated from different
birds in 2012 in China. Based on whole-genome sequences, we divided the viruses
into four genotypes. The DKE26, GSE43, and DKE53 viruses belonged to Genotypes
1-3, respectively. The CKE93 and CKE96 viruses were classified into Genotype 4.
Genotypes 1-3 correspond to the viruses containing the HA gene of clade 2.3.2,
and Genotype 4 is the virus that bears the HA gene of clade 7.2. To better
understand the pathogenicity and transmission of the viruses, we infected
chickens with 103 EID50/0.1 ml GSE43 (clade 2.3.2) or CKE93 (clade 7.2) virus.
Our results revealed that 6 of 7 specific-pathogen-free (SPF) chickens inoculated
with GSE43 virus were dead before 7-day post-infection, but all the SPF chickens 
inoculated with CKE93 virus survived the infection. Both the GSE43 and CKE93
viruses replicated systemically in chickens. The virus titers of GSE43 virus in
tested organs were obviously higher than those of CKE93 virus. Our results
revealed that the pathogenicity and replication of GSE43 in chickens was much
higher than those of CKE93. The GSE43 virus could transmit between chickens, but 
the CKE93 could not transmit between chickens by naïve contact. Therefore,
different clades of H5N1 AIVs possessed variable pathogenicities and transmission
abilities among chickens. Our study contributes to knowledge of pathogenic
variations of prevalent H5N1 viruses.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00328 
PMCID: PMC5515836
PMID: 28770175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17626485

1. Avian Dis. 2007 Jun;51(2):568-72.

Characterization of H5N1 influenza viruses isolated from migratory birds in
Qinghai province of China in 2006.

Lei F(1), Tang S, Zhao D, Zhang X, Kou Z, Li Y, Zhang Z, Yin Z, Chen S, Li S,
Zhang D, Yan B, Li T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100080, People's
Republic of China.

Avian influenza H5N1 viruses pose a significant threat to human health because of
their ability to infect humans directly. In the paper, three highly pathogenic
H5N1 influenza viruses were isolated from three species of migratory birds in
Qinghai Province of China in 2006. The analysis of the genome sequences indicated
that the three isolates shared high homology with each other (94% to 99%). Three 
isolates shared a common ancestor and were closest to strains isolated from
Qinghai and Siberia in 2005, but distinct from poultry viruses found in Southeast
Asia. In experimental infection, all three viruses were highly pathogenic to
chickens and mice. The results suggest that highly pathogenic avian influenza
H5N1 viruses still exist in the migratory birds and could spread to other regions
with wild bird migration.

DOI: 10.1637/0005-2086(2007)51[568:COHIVI]2.0.CO;2 
PMID: 17626485  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19800184

1. Vet Microbiol. 2010 Mar 24;141(3-4):362-6. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2009.09.011.
Epub 2009 Sep 19.

An outbreak of highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza in Korea, 2008.

Kim HR(1), Park CK, Lee YJ, Woo GH, Lee KK, Oem JK, Kim SH, Jean YH, Bae YC, Yoon
SS, Roh IS, Jeong OM, Kim HY, Choi JS, Byun JW, Song YK, Kwon JH, Joo YS.

Author information: 
(1)National Veterinary Research and Quarantine Service, 335 Joongangro Manangu
Anyangsi, Gyeonggido 430-824, Republic of Korea. kimhr@nvrqs.go.kr

In spite of intensive surveillance programs for the control of HPAI, an outbreak 
of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 in Korea in April 2008 caused
serious damage to poultry farms, as did previous outbreaks in 2003/2004 and
2006/2007. Six viruses were selected from the Korean 2008 isolates for genetic
analysis, and all eight gene segments from each of the influenza viruses were
sequenced. A phylogenetic analysis showed that all of the viruses were of the
same virus type and that the hemagglutinin (HA) gene was clustered with that of
clade 2.3.2 viruses. However, the internal and neuraminidase (NA) genes were
closely related to those of the clade 2.3.4 viruses (recent human and bird
isolates from Southeast Asia).

Crown Copyright 2009. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2009.09.011 
PMID: 19800184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21632563

1. J Gen Virol. 2011 Sep;92(Pt 9):2105-2110. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.032623-0. Epub 2011 
Jun 1.

Genetic diversification of H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza A virus during 
replication in wild ducks.

Watanabe Y(1), Ibrahim MS(1), Ellakany HF(2), Abd El-Hamid HS(2), Ikuta K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka
University, 3-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
(2)Department of Poultry Diseases and Hygiene, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Alexandria University, Egypt.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza A virus subtype H5N1 can potentially generate
novel variants during replication of infected hosts. To determine which H5N1
variants predominate in wild birds, we determined the sequences of RT-PCR
amplified viral genes from several organs of infected chickens and ducks from
Egypt, where H5N1 outbreaks in birds are endemic. Comparison of the sequences in 
viruses from trachea, lung, brain and liver revealed diversification with
different amino acid substitutions in different ducks, but no diversification in 
chickens. These specific amino acid substitutions were rare among viruses
currently circulating in Egypt. In addition, the H5N1 variants showed distinct
growth kinetics in duck, canine and human cells. Our findings suggested that
ducks can generate H5N1 variants with novel amino acid substitutions that might
serve as aetiological agents for new influenza virus outbreaks and epidemics.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.032623-0 
PMID: 21632563  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23776615

1. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 11;8(6):e66105. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066105. Print 2013.

I222 Neuraminidase mutations further reduce oseltamivir susceptibility of
Indonesian Clade 2.1 highly pathogenic Avian Influenza A(H5N1) viruses.

McKimm-Breschkin JL(1), Barrett S, Pudjiatmoko, Azhar M, Wong FY, Selleck P, Mohr
PG, McGrane J, Kim M.

Author information: 
(1)Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, Materials
Science and Engineering, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. mck245@csiro.au

We have tested the susceptibility to neuraminidase inhibitors of 155 clade 2.1
H5N1 viruses from Indonesia, isolated between 2006-2008 as well as 12 clade 1
isolates from Thailand and Cambodia from 2004-2007 using a fluorometric
MUNANA-based enzyme inhibition assay. The Thailand and Cambodian clade 1 isolates
tested here were all susceptible to oseltamivir and zanamivir, and sequence
comparison indicated that reduced oseltamivir susceptibility we observed
previously with clade 1 Cambodian isolates correlated with an S246G neuraminidase
mutation. Eight Indonesian viruses (5%), all bearing I222 neuraminidase
mutations, were identified as mild to extreme outliers for oseltamivir based on
statistical analysis by box plots. IC50s were from 50 to 500-fold higher than the
reference clade 1 virus from Viet Nam, ranging from 43-75 nM for I222T/V mutants 
and from 268-349 nM for I222M mutants. All eight viruses were from different
geographic locales; all I222M variants were from central Sumatra. None of the
H5N1 isolates tested demonstrated reduced susceptibility to zanamivir (IC50s all 
<5 nM). All I222 mutants showed loss of slow binding specifically for oseltamivir
in an IC50 kinetics assay. We identified four other Indonesian isolates with
higher IC50s which also demonstrated loss of slow binding, including one virus
with an I117V mutation. There was a minimal effect on the binding of zanamivir
and peramivir for all isolates tested. As H5N1 remains a potential pandemic
threat, the incidence of mutations conferring reduced oseltamivir susceptibility 
is concerning and emphasizes the need for greater surveillance of drug
susceptibility.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066105 
PMCID: PMC3679007
PMID: 23776615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23650608

1. FEBS Open Bio. 2012 Sep 5;2:261-6. doi: 10.1016/j.fob.2012.08.007. Print 2012.

Amino acid determinants conferring stable sialidase activity at low pH for H5N1
influenza A virus neuraminidase.

Takahashi T(1), Nidom CA, Quynh Le MT, Suzuki T, Kawaoka Y.

Author information: 
(1)Influenza Research Institute, Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA ;
Department of Biochemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
Shizuoka, and Global COE Program for Innovation in Human Health Sciences, Japan.

Avian influenza A viruses (IAVs) and human 1918, 1957, and 1968 pandemic IAVs all
have neuraminidases (NAs) that are stable at low pH sialidase activity, yet most 
human epidemic IAVs do not. We examined the pH stability of H5N1 highly
pathogenic avian IAV (HPAI) NAs and identified amino acids responsible for
conferring stability at low pH. We found that, unlike other avian viruses, most
H5N1 IAVs isolated since 2003 had NAs that were unstable at low pH, similar to
human epidemic IAVs. These H5N1 viruses are thus already human virus-like and,
therefore, have the frequent infections of humans.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fob.2012.08.007 
PMCID: PMC3642167
PMID: 23650608 


18325269

1. Emerg Infect Dis. 2008 Mar;14(3):487-90. doi: 10.3201/eid1403.070767.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza virus (H5N1) in domestic poultry and
relationship with migratory birds, South Korea.

Lee YJ(1), Choi YK, Kim YJ, Song MS, Jeong OM, Lee EK, Jeon WJ, Jeong W, Joh SJ, 
Choi KS, Her M, Kim MC, Kim A, Kim MJ, Ho Lee E, Oh TG, Moon HJ, Yoo DW, Kim JH, 
Sung MH, Poo H, Kwon JH, Kim CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Anyang, South Korea.

During the 2006-2007 winter season in South Korea, several outbreaks of highly
pathogenic avian influenza virus (H5N1) were confirmed among domestic poultry and
in migratory bird habitats. Phylogenetic analysis showed that all isolates were
closely related and that all belong to the A/bar-headed goose/Qinghai/5/2005-like
lineage rather than the A/chicken/Korea/ES/2003-like lineage.

DOI: 10.3201/eid1403.070767 
PMCID: PMC2570817
PMID: 18325269  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15731263

1. J Virol. 2005 Mar;79(6):3692-702.

Characterization of highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza A viruses isolated
from South Korea.

Lee CW(1), Suarez DL, Tumpey TM, Sung HW, Kwon YK, Lee YJ, Choi JG, Joh SJ, Kim
MC, Lee EK, Park JM, Lu X, Katz JM, Spackman E, Swayne DE, Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Southeast Poultry Research Laboratory, USDA-ARS, 934 College Station Rd.,
Athens, GA 30605, USA.

An unprecedented outbreak of H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) has
been reported for poultry in eight different Asian countries, including South
Korea, since December 2003. A phylogenetic analysis of the eight viral genes
showed that the H5N1 poultry isolates from South Korea were of avian origin and
contained the hemagglutinin and neuraminidase genes of the A/goose/Guangdong/1/96
(Gs/Gd) lineage. The current H5N1 strains in Asia, including the Korean isolates,
share a gene constellation similar to that of the Penfold Park, Hong Kong,
isolates from late 2002 and contain some molecular markers that seem to have been
fixed in the Gs/Gd lineage virus since 2001. However, despite genetic
similarities among recent H5N1 isolates, the topology of the phylogenetic tree
clearly differentiates the Korean isolates from the Vietnamese and Thai isolates 
which have been reported to infect humans. A representative Korean isolate was
inoculated into mice, with no mortality and no virus being isolated from the
brain, although high titers of virus were observed in the lungs. The same
isolate, however, caused systemic infections in chickens and quail and killed all
of the birds within 2 and 4 days of intranasal inoculation, respectively. This
isolate also replicated in multiple organs and tissues of ducks and caused some
mortality. However, lower virus titers were observed in all corresponding tissues
of ducks than in chicken and quail tissues, and the histological lesions were
restricted to the respiratory tract. This study characterizes the molecular and
biological properties of the H5N1 HPAI viruses from South Korea and emphasizes
the need for comparative analyses of the H5N1 isolates from different countries
to help elucidate the risk of a human pandemic from the strains of H5N1 HPAI
currently circulating in Asia.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.6.3692-3702.2005 
PMCID: PMC1075707
PMID: 15731263  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23861018

1. Virus Genes. 2013 Oct;47(2):317-29. doi: 10.1007/s11262-013-0954-7. Epub 2013 Jul
17.

The genetic and antigenic diversity of avian influenza viruses isolated from
domestic ducks, muscovy ducks, and chickens in northern and southern Vietnam,
2010-2012.

Okamatsu M(1), Nishi T, Nomura N, Yamamoto N, Sakoda Y, Sakurai K, Chu HD, Thanh 
LP, Van Nguyen L, Van Hoang N, Tien TN, Yoshida R, Takada A, Kida H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Microbiology, Department of Disease Control, Graduate School of 
Veterinary Medicine, Hokkaido University, Kita 18 Nishi 9, Kita-ku, Sapporo,
060-0818, Japan.

To estimate the prevalence of avian influenza virus infection in Vietnam,
surveillance was conducted in domestic and wild birds from households, live-bird 
markets, slaughtering sites, and bird sanctuaries in Vietnam between October 2010
and October 2012. Of the 4,550 samples collected, 226 influenza A virus isolates 
were obtained from domestic ducks, muscovy ducks, and chickens. Of these, 25 and 
22 H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses (HPAIVs) were isolated from
apparently healthy domestic ducks in live-bird markets and slaughtering sites in 
northern and southern Vietnam, respectively. The HA genes of H5 viruses isolated 
from birds in northern Vietnam phylogenetically belonged to the genetic clade
2.3.2.1 and those in southern Vietnam belonged to the genetic clade 1.1. In
addition, 39 H3, 12 H4, 1 H5, 93 H6, 2 H7, 18 H9, 3 H10, and 11 H11 viruses were 
isolated. Phylogenetic and antigenic analyses of the H6 and H9 viruses revealed
that they were closely related to the isolates obtained from domestic poultry in 
China. Phylogenetic analyses of internal gene segments of these isolates revealed
that these viruses were circulating in both domestic and wild birds in Asia and
reassortment events had occurred frequently. Therefore, it will be important to
continue the surveillance and strict controls over the movement and trade of
poultry and poultry products in order to eradicate H5N1 HPAIV from Asia.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-013-0954-7 
PMID: 23861018  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23226433

1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e50959. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050959. Epub 2012 Nov 30.

Phylogenetic and pathogenic analyses of avian influenza A H5N1 viruses isolated
from poultry in Vietnam.

Zhao D(1), Liang L, Li Y, Jiang Y, Liu L, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, People's Republic of
China.

Despite great efforts to control the infection of poultry with H5N1 viruses,
these pathogens continue to evolve and spread in nature, threatening public
health. Elucidating the characteristics of H5N1 avian influenza virus will
benefit disease control and pandemic preparation. Here, we sequenced the genomes 
of 15 H5N1 avian influenza viruses isolated in Vietnam in 2006 and 2007 and
performed phylogenetic analyses to compare these sequences with those of other
viruses available in the public databases. Molecular characterization of the H5N1
viruses revealed that seven genetically distinct clades of H5N1 viruses have
appeared in Vietnam. Clade 2.3.4 viruses existed in Vietnam as early as 2005.
Fifteen viruses isolated during 2006 and 2007 belonged to clade 1 and clade
2.3.4, and were divided into five genotypes. Reassortants between the clade 1 and
clade 2.3.4 viruses were detected in both North and South Vietnam. We also
assessed the replication and pathogenicity of these viruses in mice and found
that these isolates replicated efficiently and exhibited distinct virulence in
mice. Our results provide important information regarding the diversity of H5N1
viruses in nature.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050959 
PMCID: PMC3511418
PMID: 23226433  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17616798

1. Virus Genes. 2007 Dec;35(3):497-502. Epub 2007 Jul 7.

Molecular characterization of the glycoprotein genes of H5N1 influenza A viruses 
isolated in Israel and the Gaza Strip during 2006 outbreaks.

Perk S(1), Banet-Noach C, Golender N, Simanov L, Rozenblut E, Nagar S, Pokamunski
S, Pirak M, Tendler Y, García M, Panshin A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Avian and Aquatic Diseases, Kimron Veterinary Institute, POB 12,
Beit Dagan 50250, Israel.

Highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza A viruses (AIV) have caused outbreaks
among domestic poultry and wild aquatic birds in many Asian, European, and
African countries since 1997. In March 2006 an avian H5N1 influenza A virus was
isolated from poultry in Israel. In the present study we molecularly
characterized the hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) genes of eleven H5N1 
viruses isolated from domestic poultry in Israel and Gaza in March-April 2006.
Phylogenetic analysis of the HA and NA genes showed that the Israeli and Gazian
viruses were closely related to viruses isolated in Egypt in 2006.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-007-0120-1 
PMID: 17616798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22515536

1. Avian Pathol. 2012;41(2):177-93. doi: 10.1080/03079457.2012.656578.

Challenges for accurate and prompt molecular diagnosis of clades of highly
pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 viruses emerging in Vietnam.

Slomka MJ(1), To TL, Tong HH, Coward VJ, Hanna A, Shell W, Pavlidis T, Densham
AL, Kargiolakis G, Arnold ME, Banks J, Brown IH.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Health and Veterinary Laboratories Agency (AHVLA-Weybridge), Woodham
Lane, Addlestone, Surrey, UK. Marek.Slomka@ahvla.gsi.gov.uk

Forty-six chickens and 48 ducks were sampled from four Vietnamese poultry
premises in 2009 infected with H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI)
clade 2.3.2 and 2.3.4 viruses, which also differed by cleavage site (CS)
sequences in their haemagglutinin (HA) genes. All clinical specimens (n=282),
namely tracheal and cloacal swabs plus feathers, were tested by five Eurasian
reverse-transcriptase AI RealTime polymerase chain reaction (RRT-PCR) methods.
Bayesian modelling showed similar high sensitivity for the validated H5 HA2
RRT-PCR and a new modified M-gene RRT-PCR that utilizes lyophilized reagents.
Both were more sensitive than the validated "wet" M-gene RRT-PCR. Another
RRT-PCR, which targeted the H5-gene CS region, was effective for clade 2.3.4
detection, but severely compromised for clade 2.3.2 viruses. Reduced sensitivity 
of the H5 CS and "wet" M-gene RRT-PCRs correlated with mismatches between the
target and the primer and/or probe sequences. However, the H5 HA2 RRT-PCR
sensitively detected both clade 2.3.2 and 2.3.4 viruses, and agreed with N1
RRT-PCR results. Feather testing from diseased chicken and duck flocks by AI
RRT-PCRs resulted in the most sensitive identification of H5N1 HPAI-infected
birds. Evolution of new H5N1 HPAI clades remains a concern for currently affected
Asian countries, but also for more distant regions where it is important to be
prepared for new incursions of H5N1 HPAI viruses. Genetic evidence for adamantane
resistance and sensitivity was also observed in isolates from both clades.

DOI: 10.1080/03079457.2012.656578 
PMID: 22515536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21586098

1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2011 Dec;58(6):537-43. doi:
10.1111/j.1865-1682.2011.01229.x. Epub 2011 May 18.

Recent avian influenza virus A/H5N1 evolution in vaccinated and unvaccinated
poultry from farms in Southern Vietnam, January-March 2010.

Long NT(1), Thanh TT, van Doorn HR, Vu PP, Dung PT, Dung TT, Tien TN, Thao DT,
Hung P, Quang NV, Hoa NT, Bryant JE, Boni MF.

Author information: 
(1)Regional Animal Health Office No. 6, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.  

We report 15 new avian influenza virus A/H5N1 haemagglutinin (HA) sequences
sampled from visibly sick domestic poultry in southern Vietnam, between 1 January
2010 and 6 March 2010. These HA sequences form a new sub-clade of the clade 1
H5N1 viruses that have been circulating in Vietnam since 2003/2004. The viruses
are characterized by a change from isoleucine to valine at position 514 (I514V)
and are 1.8% divergent at the nucleotide level from HA sequences sampled in
Vietnam in 2007. Five new amino acid changes were observed at previously
identified antigenic sites, and three were located within structural elements of 
the receptor-binding domain. One new mutation removed a potential N-linked
glycosylation site, and a methionine insertion was observed in one virus at the
polybasic cleavage site. Five of these viruses were sampled from farms where
poultry were vaccinated against H5N1, but there was no association between
observed amino acid changes and flock vaccination status. Despite the current
lack of evidence for antigenic drift or immune escape in Vietnamese H5N1 viruses,
continued surveillance remains a high priority.

© 2011 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1865-1682.2011.01229.x 
PMCID: PMC3258422
PMID: 21586098  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19279171

1. J Clin Microbiol. 2009 Apr;47(4):988-93. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01346-08. Epub 2009 Mar
11.

Universal detection and identification of avian influenza virus by use of
resequencing microarrays.

Lin B(1), Malanoski AP, Wang Z, Blaney KM, Long NC, Meador CE, Metzgar D, Myers
CA, Yingst SL, Monteville MR, Saad MD, Schnur JM, Tibbetts C, Stenger DA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Bio/Molecular Science & Engineering, Naval Research Laboratory,
Washington, DC 20375, USA. baochuan.lin@nrl.navy.mil

Zoonotic microbes have historically been, and continue to emerge as, threats to
human health. The recent outbreaks of highly pathogenic avian influenza virus in 
bird populations and the appearance of some human infections have increased the
concern of a possible new influenza pandemic, which highlights the need for
broad-spectrum detection methods for rapidly identifying the spread or outbreak
of all variants of avian influenza virus. In this study, we demonstrate that
high-density resequencing pathogen microarrays (RPM) can be such a tool. The
results from 37 influenza virus isolates show that the RPM platform is an
effective means for detecting and subtyping influenza virus, while simultaneously
providing sequence information for strain resolution, pathogenicity, and drug
resistance without additional analysis. This study establishes that the RPM
platform is a broad-spectrum pathogen detection and surveillance tool for
monitoring the circulation of prevalent influenza viruses in the poultry industry
and in wild birds or incidental exposures and infections in humans.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01346-08 
PMCID: PMC2668298
PMID: 19279171  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19937535

1. Avian Pathol. 2009 Dec;38(6):457-67. doi: 10.1080/03079450903349147.

Characterization of duck H5N1 influenza viruses with differing pathogenicity in
mallard (Anas platyrhynchos) ducks.

Tang Y(1), Wu P, Peng D, Wang X, Wan H, Zhang P, Long J, Zhang W, Li Y, Wang W,
Zhang X, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Infectious Disease, Ministry of Agriculture, School
of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu, China.

A number of H5N1 influenza outbreaks have occurred in aquatic birds in Asia. As
aquatic birds are the natural reservoir of influenza A viruses and do not usually
show clinical disease upon infection, the repeated H5N1 outbreaks have
highlighted the importance of continuous surveillance on H5N1 viruses in aquatic 
birds. In the present study we characterized the biological properties of four
H5N1 avian influenza viruses, which had been isolated from ducks, in different
animal models. In specific pathogen free (SPF) chickens, all four isolates were
highly pathogenic. In SPF mice, the S and Y isolates were moderately pathogenic. 
However, in mallard ducks, two isolates had low pathogenicity, while the other
two were highly pathogenic and caused lethal infection. A representative isolate 
with high pathogenicity in ducks caused systemic infection and replicated
effectively in all 10 organs tested in challenged ducks, whereas a representative
isolate with low pathogenicity in ducks was only detected in some organs in a few
challenged ducks. Comparison of complete genomic sequences from the four isolates
showed that the same amino acid residues that have been reported to be associated
with virulence and host adaption/restriction of influenza viruses were present in
the PB2, HA, NA, M and NS genes, while the amino acid residues at the HA cleavage
site were diverse. From these results it appeared that the virulence of H5N1
avian influenza viruses was increased for ducks and that amino acid substitutions
at the HA cleavage site might have contributed to the differing pathogenicity of 
these isolates in mallards. A procedure for the intravenous pathogenicity index
test in a mallard model for assessing the virulence of H5/H7 subtype avian
influenza viruses in waterfowl is described.

DOI: 10.1080/03079450903349147 
PMID: 19937535  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18631423

1. Epidemiol Infect. 2009 Apr;137(4):456-63. doi: 10.1017/S0950268808000988. Epub
2008 Jul 17.

Molecular characterization and epidemiology of the highly pathogenic avian
influenza H5N1 in Nigeria.

Fasina FO(1), Bisschop SP, Joannis TM, Lombin LH, Abolnik C.

Author information: 
(1)National Veterinary Research Institute, Vom, Nigeria. daydupe2003@yahoo.co.uk

Avian influenza caused infection and spread throughout Nigeria in 2006. Carcass
samples (lung, liver, spleen, heart, trachea and intestine) from the different
regions of Nigeria were processed for virus isolation. Infective allantoic fluids
were tested for avian influenza viruses (AIV) and Newcastle disease virus using
monospecific antisera. Thirty-five isolates were generated and characterized
molecularly using the haemagglutinin gene. The molecular analysis indicated that 
different sublineages of the highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1
viruses spread throughout Nigeria. We compared the Nigerian isolates with others 
from Africa and results indicated close similarities between isolates from West
Africa and Sudan. Some of the analysed viruses showed genetic drift, and the
implications of these for future epidemiology and ecology of avian influenza in
Africa require further evaluation. The spread of primary outbreaks was strongly
linked to trade (legal and illegal), live bird markets, inappropriate disposal,
and poorly implemented control measures. No strong correlation existed between
wild birds and HPAI H5N1 in Nigeria.

DOI: 10.1017/S0950268808000988 
PMID: 18631423  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15148370

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 May 25;101(21):8156-61. Epub 2004 May 17.

H5N1 influenza: a protean pandemic threat.

Guan Y(1), Poon LL, Cheung CY, Ellis TM, Lim W, Lipatov AS, Chan KH,
Sturm-Ramirez KM, Cheung CL, Leung YH, Yuen KY, Webster RG, Peiris JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, People's
Republic of China. yguan@hkucc.hku.hk

Infection with avian influenza A virus of the H5N1 subtype (isolates A/HK/212/03 
and A/HK/213/03) was fatal to one of two members of a family in southern China in
2003. This incident was preceded by lethal outbreaks of H5N1 influenza in
waterfowl, which are the natural hosts of these viruses and, therefore, normally 
have asymptomatic infection. The hemagglutinin genes of the A/HK/212/03-like
viruses isolated from humans and waterfowl share the lineage of the H5N1 viruses 
that caused the first known cases of human disease in Hong Kong in 1997, but
their internal protein genes originated elsewhere. The hemagglutinin of the
recent human isolates has undergone significant antigenic drift. Like the 1997
human H5N1 isolates, the 2003 human H5N1 isolates induced the overproduction of
proinflammatory cytokines by primary human macrophages in vitro, whereas the
precursor H5N1 viruses and other H5N1 reassortants isolated in 2001 did not. The 
acquisition by the viruses of characteristics that enhance virulence in humans
and waterfowl and their potential for wider distribution by infected migrating
birds are causes for renewed pandemic concern.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0402443101 
PMCID: PMC419573
PMID: 15148370  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27922116

1. Sci Rep. 2016 Dec 6;6:38388. doi: 10.1038/srep38388.

Risk assessment of recent Egyptian H5N1 influenza viruses.

Arafa AS(1), Yamada S(2), Imai M(2), Watanabe T(2), Yamayoshi S(2),
Iwatsuki-Horimoto K(2), Kiso M(2), Sakai-Tagawa Y(2), Ito M(2), Imamura T(2),
Nakajima N(3), Takahashi K(3), Zhao D(2), Oishi K(2), Yasuhara A(2), Macken
CA(4), Zhong G(5), Hanson AP(5), Fan S(5), Ping J(5), Hatta M(5), Lopes TJ(5),
Suzuki Y(6), El-Husseiny M(1), Selim A(1), Hagag N(1), Soliman M(7), Neumann
G(5), Hasegawa H(3), Kawaoka Y(2)(5)(8).

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory for Veterinary Quality Control on Poultry Production,
Animal Health Research Institute, Dokki, Giza, Egypt.
(2)Division of Virology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of 
Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology, National Institute of Infectious Diseases,
Sinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8640, Japan.
(4)Bioinformatics Institute, The University of Auckland, Auckland 1142, New
Zealand.
(5)Influenza Research Institute, Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53711, USA.
(6)College of Life and Health Sciences, Chubu University, Aichi 487-8501, Japan.
(7)General Organization for Veterinary Services, Dokki, Giza, Egypt.
(8)Department of Special Pathogens, International Research Center for Infectious 
Diseases, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo
108-8639, Japan.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) viruses of the H5N1 subtype are enzootic
in poultry populations in different parts of the world, and have caused numerous 
human infections in recent years, particularly in Egypt. However, no sustained
human-to-human transmission of these viruses has yet been reported. We tested
nine naturally occurring Egyptian H5N1 viruses (isolated in 2014-2015) in ferrets
and found that three of them transmitted via respiratory droplets, causing a
fatal infection in one of the exposed animals. All isolates were sensitive to
neuraminidase inhibitors. However, these viruses were not transmitted via
respiratory droplets in three additional transmission experiments in ferrets.
Currently, we do not know if the efficiency of transmission is very low or if
subtle differences in experimental parameters contributed to these inconsistent
results. Nonetheless, our findings heighten concern regarding the pandemic
potential of recent Egyptian H5N1 influenza viruses.

DOI: 10.1038/srep38388 
PMCID: PMC5138598
PMID: 27922116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Y.K. has received speaker’s honoraria from Toyama
Chemical and Astellas Inc., has received grant support from Chugai
Pharmaceuticals, Daiichi Sankyo Pharmaceutical, Toyama Chemical, Tauns
Laboratories, Inc., Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., and Denka Seiken Co., Ltd., 
and is a Co-founder of FluGen. G.N. is a Co-founder of FluGen.


23804642

1. J Virol. 2013 Sep;87(17):9452-62. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00776-13. Epub 2013 Jun 26.

Complex reassortment of multiple subtypes of avian influenza viruses in domestic 
ducks at the Dongting Lake Region of China.

Deng G(1), Tan D, Shi J, Cui P, Jiang Y, Liu L, Tian G, Kawaoka Y, Li C, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, China.

To gain insight into the ecology of avian influenza viruses (AIV), we conducted
active influenza virus surveillance in domestic ducks on farms located on the
flyway of migratory birds in the Dongting Lake region of Hunan Province, China,
from winter 2011 until spring 2012. Specimens comprising 3,030 duck swab samples 
and 1,010 environmental samples were collected from 101 duck farms. We isolated
AIV of various HA subtypes, including H3, H4, H5, H6, H9, H10, H11, and H12. We
sequenced the entire coding sequences of the genomes of 28 representative
isolates constituting 13 specific subtypes. When the phylogenetic relationships
among these isolates were examined, we observed that extensive reassortment
events had occurred. Among the 28 Dongting Lake viruses, 21 genotypes involving
the six internal genes were identified. Furthermore, we identified viruses or
viral genes introduced from other countries, viral gene segments of unknown
origin, and a novel HA/NA combination. Our findings emphasize the importance of
farmed domestic ducks in the Dongting Lake region to the genesis and evolution of
AIV and highlight the need for continued surveillance of domestic ducks in this
region.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00776-13 
PMCID: PMC3754128
PMID: 23804642  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22498319

1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2013 Apr;60(2):127-39. doi:
10.1111/j.1865-1682.2012.01325.x. Epub 2012 Apr 12.

Two highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 viruses of clade 2.3.2.1 with similar 
genetic background but with different pathogenicity in mice and ducks.

Hu J(1), Zhao K, Liu X, Wang X, Chen Z, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Infectious Disease Laboratory, School of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou 
University, Yangzhou, China.

A number of genetic markers for virulence of avian influenza viruses (AIVs) in
different hosts have been identified. However, we isolated two H5N1 AIVs,
A/Chicken/Jiangsu/k0402/2010(CK/10) and A/Goose/Jiangsu/k0403/2010(GS/10) with
similar genetic background, but most well-defined molecular markers for virulence
in mammals and avian species were not found in both viral genomes. In addition,
pathogenicity of this pair of viruses in different hosts remains unclear.
Therefore, we evaluated their pathogenicity in chickens, mice, ducks and guinea
pigs. Infection of CK/10 and GS/10 in chickens caused 100% mortality within 24 h.
Mouse experiment showed that CK/10 was highly pathogenic (MLD50 = 0.33 log10
EID50), whereas GS/10 was avirulent (MLD50 > 6.32 log10 EID50). Interestingly,
the virulence of CK/10 in ducks (DLD50 = 3.83 log10 EID50) was higher than that
of GS/10 (DLD50 = 7.7 log10 EID50), which correlated with viral pathogenicity in 
mice. Although CK/10 and GS/10 showed distinct pathogenicity in mice, they both
were lethal to guinea pigs, with CK/10 replicating to higher titres in airways
than GS/10. Collectively, these findings suggest that AIVs with similar genetic
backgrounds may exhibit distinct pathogenicity in specific hosts and that some
unknown molecular markers for virulence may exist and need to be identified.

© 2012 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1865-1682.2012.01325.x 
PMID: 22498319  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19924254

1. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 16;4(11):e7846. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007846.

Characterization of the influenza A H5N1 viruses of the 2008-09 outbreaks in
India reveals a third introduction and possible endemicity.

Chakrabarti AK(1), Pawar SD, Cherian SS, Koratkar SS, Jadhav SM, Pal B, Raut S,
Thite V, Kode SS, Keng SS, Payyapilly BJ, Mullick J, Mishra AC.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Containment Complex, National Institute of Virology, Pune, India.

Widespread infection of highly pathogenic avian influenza A H5N1 was reported
from backyard and commercial poultry in West Bengal (WB), an eastern state of
India in early 2008. Infection gradually spread to Tripura, Assam and Sikkim, the
northeastern states, with 70 outbreaks reported between January 2008 and May
2009. Whole genome sequence analysis of three isolates from WB, one isolate from 
Tripura along with the analysis of hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA)
genes of 17 other isolates was performed during this study. In the HA gene
phylogenetic tree, all the 2008-09 Indian isolates belonged to EMA3 sublineage of
clade 2.2. The closest phylogenetic relationship was found to be with the 2007-09
isolates from Bangladesh and not with the earlier 2006 and 2007 Indian isolates
implying a third introduction into the country. The receptor-binding pocket of
HA1 of two isolates from WB showed S221P mutation, one of the markers predicted
to be associated with human receptor specificity. Two substitutions E119A (2
isolates of WB) and N294S (2 other isolates of WB) known to confer resistance to 
NA inhibitors were observed in the active site of neuraminidase. Several
additional mutations were observed within the 2008-09 Indian isolates indicating 
genetic diversification. Overall, the study is indicative of a possible
endemicity in the eastern and northeastern parts of the country, demanding active
surveillance specifically in view of the critical mutations that have been
observed in the influenza A H5N1 viruses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007846 
PMCID: PMC2775943
PMID: 19924254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18931064

1. J Gen Virol. 2008 Nov;89(Pt 11):2691-2697. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.2008/004259-0.

Co-circulation of two sublineages of HPAI H5N1 virus in the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia with unique molecular signatures suggesting separate introductions into
the commercial poultry and falconry sectors.

Monne I(1), Fusaro A(1), Al-Blowi MH(2), Ismail MM(3), Khan OA(4), Dauphin G(5), 
Tripodi A(5), Salviato A(1), Marangon S(1), Capua I(1), Cattoli G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale delle Venezie, OIE/FAO and National
Reference Laboratory for Newcastle Disease and Avian Influenza, Viale
dell'Università 10, Legnaro, Padova, Italy.
(2)Veterinary Labs Administration, Ministry of Agriculture, Riyadh, Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Poultry Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kafr-Elsheikh 
University, Egypt.
(4)Central Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory, PO Box 15831, Riyadh 11454, Kingdom 
of Saudi Arabia.
(5)Animal Health Service, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00153 Rome, Italy.

Since early 2007, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA) has experienced several
highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 outbreaks in the falconry and
poultry sectors. The public health threat associated with peculiar husbandry
systems, requiring close contact between humans and birds of prey, highlights the
need of an improved understanding of the epidemiology and of the viral
characteristics of H5N1 viruses circulating in the region. Here we report
molecular and phylogenetic analyses of H5N1 viruses isolated in the KSA in 2007
in distinct compartments of avian husbandry. From the results of our
investigation it appears that two separate introductions into the different
sectors occurred. The identification of specific amino acid mutations, which are 
described as genetic signatures of human influenza A viruses or known to confer
resistance to antiviral drugs, raises concerns for the possible human health
implications of the KSA H5N1 viruses.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.2008/004259-0 
PMCID: PMC2886959
PMID: 18931064  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21782862

1. Virus Res. 2011 Sep;160(1-2):305-15. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2011.07.003. Epub
2011 Jul 12.

Genetic characterization and pathogenicity assessment of highly pathogenic H5N1
avian influenza viruses isolated from migratory wild birds in 2011, South Korea.

Kwon HI(1), Song MS, Pascua PN, Baek YH, Lee JH, Hong SP, Rho JB, Kim JK, Poo H, 
Kim CJ, Choi YK.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine and Medical Research Institute, Chungbuk National
University, 12 Gaeshin-Dong Heungduk-Ku, Cheongju 361-763, Republic of Korea.

The continued spread of a highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 virus
among wild birds and poultry has posed a potential threat to human public health.
In the present study, we report the isolation of HPAI H5N1 viruses
(A/Md/Korea/W401/11 and A/Md/Korea/W404/11) from fecal samples of migratory
birds. Genetic and phlyogenetic analyses demonstrated that these viruses are
genetically identical possessing gene segments from avian virus origin and
showing highest sequence similarities (as high as 99.8%) to A/Ws/Hokkaido/4/11
and 2009-2010 Mongolian-like clade 2.3.2 isolates rather than previous Korean
H5N1 viruses. Both viruses possess the polybasic motif (QRERRRK/R) in HA but
other genes did not bear additional virulence markers. Pathogenicity of
A/Md/Korea/W401/11 was assessed and compared with a 2006 clade 2.2 HPAI H5N1
migratory bird isolate (A/EM/Korea/W149/06) in chickens, ducks, mice and ferrets.
Experimental infection in these hosts showed that both viruses have high
pathogenic potential in chickens (2.3-3.0 LD(50)s) and mice (3.3-3.9 LD(50)s),
but A/Md/Korea/W401/11 was less pathogenic in duck and ferret models. Despite
recovery of both infection viruses in the upper respiratory tract, efficient
ferret-to-ferret transmission was not observed. These data suggest that the 2011 
Korean HPAI wild bird H5N1 virus could replicate in mammalian hosts without
pre-adaptation but could not sustain subsequent infection. This study highlights 
the role of migratory birds in the perpetuation and spread of HPAI H5N1 viruses
in Far-East Asia. With the changing pathobiology caused by H5N1 viruses among
wild and poultry birds, continued surveillance of influenza viruses among
migratory bird species remains crucial for effective monitoring of
high-pathogenicity or pandemic influenza viruses.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2011.07.003 
PMID: 21782862  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19290041

1. PLoS One. 2009;4(3):e4842. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004842. Epub 2009 Mar 17.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza virus subtype H5N1 in Africa: a comprehensive
phylogenetic analysis and molecular characterization of isolates.

Cattoli G(1), Monne I, Fusaro A, Joannis TM, Lombin LH, Aly MM, Arafa AS,
Sturm-Ramirez KM, Couacy-Hymann E, Awuni JA, Batawui KB, Awoume KA, Aplogan GL,
Sow A, Ngangnou AC, El Nasri Hamza IM, Gamatié D, Dauphin G, Domenech JM, Capua
I.

Author information: 
(1)OIE/FAO Reference Laboratory for avian influenza and Newcastle disease,
Istituto Zooprofilattico Sper.le delle Venezie, Legnaro, PD, Italy.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza virus A/H5N1 was first officially reported in
Africa in early 2006. Since the first outbreak in Nigeria, this virus spread
rapidly to other African countries. From its emergence to early 2008, 11 African 
countries experienced A/H5N1 outbreaks in poultry and human cases were also
reported in three of these countries. At present, little is known of the
epidemiology and molecular evolution of A/H5N1 viruses in Africa. We have
generated 494 full gene sequences from 67 African isolates and applied molecular 
analysis tools to a total of 1,152 A/H5N1 sequences obtained from viruses
isolated in Africa, Europe and the Middle East between 2006 and early 2008.
Detailed phylogenetic analyses of the 8 gene viral segments confirmed that 3
distinct sublineages were introduced, which have persisted and spread across the 
continent over this 2-year period. Additionally, our molecular epidemiological
studies highlighted the association between genetic clustering and area of origin
in a majority of cases. Molecular signatures unique to strains isolated in
selected areas also gave us a clearer picture of the spread of A/H5N1 viruses
across the continent. Mutations described as typical of human influenza viruses
in the genes coding for internal proteins or associated with host adaptation and 
increased resistance to antiviral drugs have also been detected in the genes
coding for transmembrane proteins. These findings raise concern for the possible 
human health risk presented by viruses with these genetic properties and
highlight the need for increased efforts to monitor the evolution of A/H5N1
viruses across the African continent. They further stress how imperative it is to
implement sustainable control strategies to improve animal and public health at a
global level.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004842 
PMCID: PMC2653644
PMID: 19290041  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23469251

1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e57894. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057894. Epub 2013 Mar 1.

Kinetic characterization of PB1-F2-mediated immunopathology during highly
pathogenic avian H5N1 influenza virus infection.

Leymarie O(1), Jouvion G, Hervé PL, Chevalier C, Lorin V, Lecardonnel J, Da Costa
B, Delmas B, Escriou N, Le Goffic R.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Virologie et Immunologie Moléculaires, UR 892 INRA, Domaine de
Vilvert, Jouy-en-Josas, France.

The PB1-F2 protein encoded by influenza A viruses can contribute to virulence, a 
feature that is dependent of its sequence polymorphism. Whereas PB1-F2 from some 
H1N1 viruses were shown to exacerbate the inflammatory response within the
airways, the contribution of PB1-F2 to highly pathogenic avian influenza virus
(HPAIV) virulence in mammals remains poorly described. Using a H5N1 HPAIV strain 
isolated from duck and its PB1-F2 knocked-out mutant, we characterized the
dynamics of PB1-F2-associated host response in a murine model of lethal
pneumonia. The mean time of death was 10 days for the two viruses, allowing us to
perform global transcriptomic analyses and detailed histological investigations
of the infected lungs at multiple time points. At day 2 post-infection (pi),
while no histopathological lesion was observed, PB1-F2 expression resulted in a
significant inhibition of cellular pathways involved in macrophage activation and
in a transcriptomic signature suggesting that it promotes damage to the
epithelial barrier. At day 4 pi, the gene profile associated with PB1-F2
expression revealed dysfunctions in NK cells activity. At day 8 pi, PB1-F2
expression was strongly associated with increased transcription of genes encoding
chemokines and cytokines implicated in the recruitment of granulocytes, as well
as expression of a number of genes encoding enzymes expressed by neutrophils.
These transcriptomic data were fully supported by the histopathological analysis 
of the mice lungs which evidenced more severe inflammatory lesions and enhanced
recruitment of neutrophils in the context of PB1-F2 expression, and thus provided
a functional corroboration to the insight obtained in this work. In summary, our 
study shows that PB1-F2 of H5N1 HPAIV markedly influences the expression of the
host transcriptome in a different way than its H1N1 counterparts: H5N1 PB1-F2
first delays the initial immune response but increases the pulmonary inflammatory
response during the late stages of infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057894 
PMCID: PMC3585811
PMID: 23469251  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21674170

1. Virus Genes. 2011 Oct;43(2):272-80. doi: 10.1007/s11262-011-0633-5. Epub 2011 Jun
15.

Genetic characterization of highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza viruses
isolated from poultry farms in Egypt.

Eladl AE(1), El-Azm KI, Ismail AE, Ali A, Saif YM, Lee CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Mansoura
University, Mansoura, Egypt.

Twenty-four avian influenza viruses were collected from poultry farms in three
different governorates in Egypt during the years 2006-2009 and genetically
characterized. All the isolates were confirmed to be type A and subtype H5
influenza virus by chromatographic strip test and hemagglutination inhibition
assay. The sequence and phylogenetic data revealed that all Egyptian isolates
cluster together and belong to subclade 2.2.1 of the H5N1 virus of Eurasian
origin. Within the clade, Egyptian isolates were classified into three major
groups (A, B, and C) based on genetic similarity and chronology of the isolation.
The majority of the recent isolates belonged to subgroup A. Interestingly, four
strains, which were isolated from the same farm with two of the samples collected
on the same day, were located in separate subgroups. In addition, the difference 
in topology between HA and NS phylogenetic trees, which indicates possible
difference in dynamics of genetic evolution in two genes, was observed. Genetic
characterization data of H5N1 isolates obtained from farms with different
vaccination histories indicate the vaccines currently being used in Egypt do not 
provide adequate level of protection. Our study provides additional evidence for 
the need for updated vaccine and warrants continuous monitoring of H5N1 influenza
virus in Egypt.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-011-0633-5 
PMID: 21674170  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26038508

1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2014 Feb;3(2):e11. doi: 10.1038/emi.2014.11. Epub 2014 Feb
12.

Multiple introductions of highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 viruses into
Bangladesh.

Marinova-Petkova A(1), Feeroz MM(2), Rabiul Alam SM(2), Kamrul Hasan M(2), Akhtar
S(2), Jones-Engel L(3), Walker D(1), McClenaghan L(1), Rubrum A(1), Franks J(1), 
Seiler P(1), Jeevan T(1), McKenzie P(1), Krauss S(1), Webby RJ(1), Webster RG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital ,
Memphis, TN 38105, USA.
(2)Department of Zoology, Jahangirnagar University , Dhaka-1342, Bangladesh.
(3)National Primate Research Center, University of Washington , Seattle, WA
98195, USA.

Highly pathogenic H5N1 and low pathogenic H9N2 influenza viruses are endemic to
poultry markets in Bangladesh and have cocirculated since 2008. H9N2 influenza
viruses circulated constantly in the poultry markets, whereas highly pathogenic
H5N1 viruses occurred sporadically, with peaks of activity in cooler months.
Thirty highly pathogenic H5N1 influenza viruses isolated from poultry were
characterized by antigenic, molecular, and phylogenetic analyses. Highly
pathogenic H5N1 influenza viruses from clades 2.2.2 and 2.3.2.1 were isolated
from live bird markets only. Phylogenetic analysis of the 30 H5N1 isolates
revealed multiple introductions of H5N1 influenza viruses in Bangladesh. There
was no reassortment between the local H9N2 influenza viruses and H5N1 genotype,
despite their prolonged cocirculation. However, we detected two reassortant H5N1 
viruses, carrying the M gene from the Chinese H9N2 lineage, which briefly
circulated in the Bangladesh poultry markets and then disappeared. On the other
hand, interclade reassortment occurred within H5N1 lineages and played a role in 
the genesis of the currently dominant H5N1 viruses in Bangladesh. Few
'human-like' mutations in H5N1 may account for the limited number of human cases.
Antigenically, clade 2.3.2.1 H5N1 viruses in Bangladesh have evolved since their 
introduction and are currently mainly homogenous, and show evidence of recent
antigenic drift. Although reassortants containing H9N2 genes were detected in
live poultry markets in Bangladesh, these reassortants failed to supplant the
dominant H5N1 lineage.

DOI: 10.1038/emi.2014.11 
PMCID: PMC3944120
PMID: 26038508 


10484749

1. Virology. 1999 Aug 15;261(1):15-9.

Genetic characterization of the pathogenic influenza A/Goose/Guangdong/1/96
(H5N1) virus: similarity of its hemagglutinin gene to those of H5N1 viruses from 
the 1997 outbreaks in Hong Kong.

Xu X(1), Subbarao, Cox NJ, Guo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Influenza Branch, Division of Viral Diseases, Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, 30333, USA. xxx1@cdc.gov

Analysis of the sequences of all eight RNA segments of the influenza A/G
oose/Guangdong/1/96 (H5N1) virus, isolated from a sick goose during an outbreak
in Guangdong province, China, in 1996, revealed that the hemagglutinin (HA) gene 
of the virus was genetically similar to those of the H5N1 viruses isolated in
Hong Kong in 1997. However, the remaining genes showed greater similarity to
other avian influenza viruses. Notably, the neuraminidase gene did no have the
19-amino-acid deletion in the stalk region seen in the H5N1 Hong Kong viruses and
the NS gene belonged to allele B, while that of the H5N1 Hong Kong viruses
belonged to allele A. These data suggest that the H5N1 viruses isolated from the 
Hong Kong outbreaks derived their HA genes from a virus similar to the
A/Goose/Guangdong/1/96 virus or shared a progenitor with this goose pathogen.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1999.9820 
PMID: 10484749  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

16704821

1. Emerg Infect Dis. 2006 Apr;12(4):681-3.

Avian influenza H5N1 in naturally infected domestic cat.

Songserm T(1), Amonsin A, Jam-on R, Sae-Heng N, Meemak N, Pariyothorn N,
Payungporn S, Theamboonlers A, Poovorawan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Kassetsart University, Nakorn Pathom, Thailand.

We report H5N1 virus infection in a domestic cat infected by eating a pigeon
carcass. The virus isolated from the pigeon and the cat showed the same cluster
as the viruses obtained during the outbreak in Thailand. Since cats are common
house pets, concern regarding disease transmission to humans exists.

DOI: 10.3201/eid1204.051396 
PMCID: PMC3294706
PMID: 16704821  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27369428

1. Virus Genes. 2016 Dec;52(6):867-871. Epub 2016 Jul 1.

Genetic characterization of highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 viruses
isolated from naturally infected pigeons in Egypt.

Elgendy EM(1)(2), Watanabe Y(3)(4), Daidoji T(1), Arai Y(1)(5), Ikuta K(5),
Ibrahim MS(1)(2), Nakaya T(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine,
465 Kawaramachi-hirokoji Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto, 602-8566, Japan.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Damanhur University, Damanhur, Egypt.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine,
465 Kawaramachi-hirokoji Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto, 602-8566, Japan.
nabe@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp.
(4)Department of Viral Infections, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, 3-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
nabe@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp.
(5)Department of Viral Infections, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, 3-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
(6)Department of Infectious Diseases, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine,
465 Kawaramachi-hirokoji Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto, 602-8566, Japan.
tnakaya@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp.

Avian influenza viruses impose serious public health burdens with significant
mortality and morbidity not only in poultry but also in humans. While poultry
susceptibility to avian influenza virus infection is well characterized, pigeons 
have been thought to have low susceptibility to these viruses. However, recent
studies reported natural pigeon infections with highly pathogenic avian influenza
H5N1 viruses. In Egypt, which is one of the H5N1 endemic areas for birds, pigeons
are raised in towers built on farms in backyards and on house roofs, providing a 
potential risk for virus transmission from pigeons to humans. In this study, we
performed genetic analysis of two H5N1 virus strains that were isolated from
naturally infected pigeons in Egypt. Genetic and phylogenetic analyses showed
that these viruses originated from Egyptian H5N1 viruses that were circulating in
chickens or ducks. Several unique mutations, not reported before in any Egyptian 
isolates, were detected in the internal genes (i.e., polymerase residues PB1-V3D,
PB1-K363R, PA-A369V, and PA-V602I; nucleoprotein residue NP-R38K; and
nonstructural protein residues NS1-D120N and NS2-F55C). Our findings suggested
that pigeons are naturally infected with H5N1 virus and can be a potential
reservoir for transmission to humans, and showed the importance of genetic
analysis of H5N1 internal genes.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-016-1369-z 
PMID: 27369428  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19742325

1. PLoS One. 2009 Sep 9;4(9):e6926. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006926.

The survey of H5N1 flu virus in wild birds in 14 Provinces of China from 2004 to 
2007.

Kou Z(1), Li Y, Yin Z, Guo S, Wang M, Gao X, Li P, Tang L, Jiang P, Luo Z, Xin Z,
Ding C, He Y, Ren Z, Cui P, Zhao H, Zhang Z, Tang S, Yan B, Lei F, Li T.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Wuhan, China.

BACKGROUND: The highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza emerged in the year 1996
in Asia, and has spread to Europe and Africa recently. At present, effective
monitoring and data analysis of H5N1 are not sufficient in Chinese mainland.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: During the period from April of 2004 to August of
2007, we collected 14,472 wild bird samples covering 56 species of 10 orders in
14 provinces of China and monitored the prevalence of flu virus based on RT-PCR
specific for H5N1 subtype. The 149 positive samples involved six orders.
Anseriformes had the highest prevalence while Passeriformes had the lowest
prevalence (2.70% versus 0.36%). Among the 24 positive species, mallard (Anas
platyrhynchos) had the highest prevalence (4.37%). A difference of prevalence was
found among 14 provinces. Qinghai had a higher prevalence than the other 13
provinces combined (3.88% versus 0.43%). The prevalence in three species in
Qinghai province (Pintail (Anas acuta), Mallard (Anas platyrhynchos) and Tufted
Duck (Aythya fuligula)) were obviously higher than those in other 13 provinces.
The results of sequence analysis indicated that the 17 strains isolated from wild
birds were distributed in five clades (2.3.1, 2.2, 2.5, 6, and 7), which
suggested that genetic diversity existed among H5N1 viruses isolated from wild
birds. The five isolates from Qinghai came from one clade (2.2) and had a short
evolutionary distance with the isolates obtained from Qinghai in the year 2005.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We have measured the prevalence of H5N1 virus in 56
species of wild birds in 14 provinces of China. Continuous monitoring in the
field should be carried out to know whether H5N1 virus can be maintained by wild 
birds.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006926 
PMCID: PMC2735031
PMID: 19742325  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28116911

1. Avian Pathol. 2017 Aug;46(4):367-375. doi: 10.1080/03079457.2017.1285391. Epub
2017 Mar 28.

Co-circulation of paramyxo- and influenza viruses in pigeons in Egypt.

Mansour SMG(1), Mohamed FF(1)(2), Eid AAM(3), Mor SK(2), Goyal SM(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Virology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine , Zagazig University 
, Zagazig , Egypt.
(2)b Department of Veterinary Population Medicine and Veterinary Diagnostic
Laboratory , University of Minnesota , St. Paul , MN , USA.
(3)c Department of Avian and Rabbit Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine ,
Zagazig University , Zagazig , Egypt.

In recent years, avian influenza virus (AIV) and Newcastle disease virus (NDV)
have caused large-scale outbreaks in many countries, including Egypt. The culling
and vaccination strategies have failed to control both viruses in Egypt. In this 
study, we investigated the outbreaks of nervous manifestations and deaths in
pigeons between 2013 and 2015. The H5N1 subtype of the highly pathogenic avian
influenza virus and pigeon paramyxovirus-1, an antigenic variant of NDV, were
found to be the cause; AIV and pigeon paramyxovirus-1 were isolated from 61.3%
(19/31) and 67.8% (21/31) of tested pigeons, respectively. Co-infection with both
viruses was detected in 51.6% of pigeons (16/31). The AIV sequences showed
PQGEKRRKKR/GLF motif at the haemagglutinin gene cleavage site, which is typical
of the highly pathogenic H5N1 subtype. The phylogenetic tree showed that the
highly pathogenic avian influenza belonged to clade 2.2.1.2. The NDV sequences
carried one of the three motifs, 112GKQGRL117, 112KRQKRF117 or 112RRQKRF117, at
the fusion protein cleavage site and were classified as genotypes I, VI and II in
NDV-class II, respectively. This indicated that different genotypes of NDV can
circulate simultaneously among pigeons. Further analysis revealed the clustering 
of some sequences in sub-genotypes Ia and VIb.2. To the best of our knowledge,
these sub-genotypes have not been previously reported from pigeons in Egypt. Our 
results should serve as a base for future studies on both viruses in Egypt.

DOI: 10.1080/03079457.2017.1285391 
PMID: 28116911  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21251691

1. Virology. 2011 Mar 30;412(1):9-18. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2010.12.040. Epub 2011
Jan 19.

Differential host gene responses in mice infected with two highly pathogenic
avian influenza viruses of subtype H5N1 isolated from wild birds in Thailand.

Hayashi T(1), Chaichoune K, Patchimasiri T, Hiromoto Y, Kawasaki Y, Wiriyarat W, 
Chakritbudsabong W, Prayoonwong N, Chaisilp N, Parchariyanon S, Ratanakorn P,
Uchida Y, Tsuda T, Saito T.

Author information: 
(1)Thailand-Japan Zoonotic Diseases Collaborating Center (ZDCC), Kasetklang,
Chatuchak, Bangkok, Thailand.

In Thailand, highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) viruses of subtype H5N1 had
been isolated from various wild birds during the HPAI outbreak in poultries. In
this study, we examined the pathogenicity of two wild bird isolates
(A/Pigeon/Thailand/VSMU-7-NPT/2004; Pigeon04 and A/Tree
sparrow/Ratchaburi/VSMU-16-RBR/2005; T.sparrow05) in mice. They showed similar
replication in several organs and lethal outcome. However, on day 3
post-infection, Pigeon04 induced mRNA expression of proinflammatory cytokines
(IL6 and TNFα) and MIP-2, neutrophil chemoattractant, in the lungs, resulting in 
severe pneumonia that was accompanied by neutrophil infiltration. In contrast, on
day 7 post-infection, T.sparrow05 induced the expression of several cytokines to 
a greater extent than Pigeon04; it also potently induced mRNA expression of
several cytokines in brains of the infected mice that triggered frequent
inflammatory events. In sum, our study demonstrated that two HPAI viruses induced
different host responses, despite having similar replications, resulting in
lethal outcome in mice.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2010.12.040 
PMCID: PMC7111900
PMID: 21251691  [Indexed for MEDLINE]



